ll
OPEN ACCESS

Leading Edge

Perspective

Empowering biomedical discovery with AI agents
Shanghua Gao,1 Ada Fang,1,2,8,11 Yepeng Huang,1,3,11 Valentina Giunchiglia,1,4,11 Ayush Noori,1,5,11
Jonathan Richard Schwarz,1 Yasha Ektefaie,1,6 Jovana Kondic,7 and Marinka Zitnik1,8,9,10,*
1Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
2Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
3Program in Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
4Department of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK
5Harvard College, Cambridge, MA, USA
6Program in Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
7Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
8Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence, Harvard University, Allston, MA, USA
9Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
10Harvard Data Science Initiative, Cambridge, MA, USA
11These authors contributed equally

*Correspondence: marinka@hms.harvard.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.09.022

SUMMARY

We envision ‘‘AI scientists’’ as systems capable of skeptical learning and reasoning that empower biomedical
research through collaborative agents that integrate AI models and biomedical tools with experimental platforms. Rather than taking humans out of the discovery process, biomedical AI agents combine human creativity and expertise with AI’s ability to analyze large datasets, navigate hypothesis spaces, and execute
repetitive tasks. AI agents are poised to be proficient in various tasks, planning discovery workflows and performing self-assessment to identify and mitigate gaps in their knowledge. These agents use large language
models and generative models to feature structured memory for continual learning and use machine learning
tools to incorporate scientific knowledge, biological principles, and theories. AI agents can impact areas
ranging from virtual cell simulation, programmable control of phenotypes, and the design of cellular circuits
to developing new therapies.

INTRODUCTION
A long-standing ambition for artificial intelligence (AI) is the
development of AI systems that can make major scientific discoveries, learn on their own, and acquire knowledge autonomously. While this concept of an ‘‘AI scientist’’ is aspirational, advances in agent-based AI pave the way to the development of AI
agents as conversable systems capable of reflective learning
and reasoning that coordinate large language models (LLMs),
machine learning (ML) tools, experimental platforms, or even
combinations of them1–4 (Figure 1). The complexity of biology
calls for approaches that flexibly decompose complex problems
into actionable tasks. AI agents can break down a problem into
manageable subtasks, which can then be addressed by agents
with specialized functions for targeted problem solving and integration of scientific knowledge.1,5 In the near future, AI agents
can accelerate discovery workflows by making them faster and
more resource-efficient. AI agents improve the efficiency of
routine tasks, automate repetitive processes, and analyze large
datasets to navigate hypothesis spaces at a scale and precision
that surpasses current human-driven efforts. This automation allows for continuous, high-throughput research that would be
impossible for human researchers to perform alone at the

same scale or speed. Looking ahead, AI agents can provide insights beyond what traditional machine learning alone can
achieve by making predictions across temporal and spatial
scales before experimental measurements at those scales are
available. Ultimately, they may help uncover new modes of
behavior within biological systems.5
This vision is possible thanks to advances in LLMs,6–8 multimodal learning, and generative models. Chat-optimized LLMs,
such as GPT-4,9 can incorporate feedback, enabling AI agents
to cooperate through conversations with each other and with humans.10 These conversations can involve agents seeking human
feedback and critique and identifying gaps in their knowledge.11,12 Then, since a single LLM can exhibit a broad range
of capabilities—especially when configured with appropriate
prompts and inference settings—conversations between differently configured agents can combine these capabilities in a
modular manner.13 LLMs have also demonstrated the ability to
solve complex tasks by breaking them into subtasks.14,15 However, suppose we follow conventional approaches to foundation
models such as LLMs and other large pre-trained models. In that
case, we may not develop AI agents that can generate novel hypotheses because such novelty would not have been in the data
used to train the model, suggesting that current foundation

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 ª 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. 6125
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective

(legend on next page)

6126 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

ll
Perspective
models alone are not sufficient for AI scientists. Using LLMs as a
comparison, generating novel hypotheses requires creativity
and grounding in scientific knowledge, whereas generating
novel text requires adherence to semantic and syntactic rules,16
so the latter approach aligns well with techniques for next-token
prediction within LLMs, while the former might not.
Here, we offer a perspective that AI scientists can be realized
as AI agents backed by humans, LLMs, ML models, and other
tools like experimental platforms that together form compound
AI systems. An AI agent should be able to formulate biomedical
hypotheses, critically evaluate them, characterize their uncertainty, and use that as a driver to acquire and refine its scientific
knowledge bases in a way that human scientists can trust.17 AI
agents should be designed to adapt to new biological insights,
incorporate the latest scientific findings, and refine hypotheses
based on experimental results. This adaptability ensures agents
remain relevant in the face of rapidly evolving biological data,16
balancing between encoding new findings and retaining old
knowledge.18
Realizing this perspective shift, biomedical AI agents can
impact areas ranging from virtual cell simulation, programmable
control of phenotypes, and the design of cellular circuits to
developing new therapies. Virtual cell simulation involves
creating detailed models of cellular processes where AI can predict the effects of genetic modifications or drug treatments on
cell behavior. This can allow for an understanding of cellular
mechanisms and generation of testable hypotheses, reducing
the time and cost of traditional methods. Programmable control
of phenotypes leverages AI agents to design precise genetic
modifications to study gene functions. For example, CRISPRbased gene editing guided by an AI agent can activate or inhibit
specific genes across large cell populations in a multi-round editing campaign. Each round involves identifying the next edit
based on the user-specified target phenotype and experimental
readout from the previous round. Designing cellular circuits involves using AI agents to predict the behavior of genetic components and optimize their arrangement to create circuits that
perform tasks such as sensing environmental changes or producing therapeutic proteins.
Ethical considerations arise from biomedical AI agents.19,20
Allowing them to make changes in environments through ML
tools or calls to experimental platforms can be dangerous.
Safeguards need to be in place to prevent harm.21 Conversely,
discovery workflows might include conversations between AI
agents (but no interaction with environments is allowed). In
that case, we need to consider the impact of such interactions
on human scientists and their reliance on AI agents. Additionally, a key challenge specific to biomedical AI agents is the
lack of large, diverse experimental datasets beyond the current

OPEN ACCESS

focus areas in structural and cell biology. AI agents must represent biomedical knowledge efficiently, generalize well to new
tasks, and acquire new skills with minimal or no additional
training. While AI agents can empower research and support
operations under human oversight, their potential impact and
associated challenges underscore the importance of responsible implementation.
EVOLVING USE OF DATA-DRIVEN MODELS IN
BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH
Over the past several decades, data-driven models have reshaped biomedical research by developing databases (DBs),
search engines, ML, and interactive and foundation learning
models (Figure 2). These models have advanced modeling of
proteins,22–26 genes,27 phenotypes,28 clinical outcomes,29–31
and chemical compounds32,33 through mining of biomedical data.
DBs and search engines
In biological research, DBs34–36 aggregate knowledge from experiments and studies, offering searchable repositories containing standardized biological data vocabularies. An example of
such a DB is the AlphaFold Protein Structure DB,37 which includes more than 200 million protein structures predicted by AlphaFold.38 Molecular search engines retrieve information from
these DBs.39–41 FoldSeek42 retrieves protein structures from
the AlphaFold DB by translating query structures into 3D interaction alphabet sequences and using pre-trained substitution
matrices. Search engines are designed to retrieve information
based on specific queries, lacking the ability to refine these
queries through reasoning. They cannot iteratively process obtained information to refine results or customize subsequent actions. Additionally, while DBs reduce the risk of misinformation
through curated data, they lack mechanisms to identify and remove irrelevant information.
Distinct from search engines, AI agents are capable of
reasoning to formulate search queries and subsequently acquire
information. Curated DBs offer structured and factual information, aiding in reducing the risks associated with misinformation
potentially generated by agent hallucinations.43,44 For example,
the retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)44 is equipped for AI
agents to answer questions based on scientific literature. A
notable feature of these agents is their ability to retrieve information when needed and to create and iteratively process the obtained passages. This reflection process makes the agent
controllable during inference, allowing for customization of its
actions to meet task requirements beyond what is possible using
search engines and DB queries.

Figure 1. Empowering biomedical research with AI agents
AI agents are laying the groundwork for AI scientists as compound AI systems capable of skeptical learning and reasoning. These multi-agent systems consist of
agents based on conversable large language models (LLMs) and can coordinate machine learning (ML) tools, experimental platforms, humans, or even combinations of them. Robotic agent, AI agent that operates robotic hardware for physical experiments; database agent, AI agent that can access information in
databases via function calling and application programming interfaces (APIs); reasoning agent, AI agent capable of direct reasoning and reasoning with feedback;
hypothesis agent, AI agent that is creative and reflective when developing hypotheses, capable of characterizing its own uncertainty and using that as a driver to
refine its scientific knowledge bases; brainstorming agent, AI agent that generates a broad spectrum of research ideas; search engine agent, AI agent that uses
search engines as tools to rapidly gather information; analysis agent, AI agent capable of analyzing experimental results to summarize findings and synthesize
concepts; and experimental planning agent, AI agent that optimizes an experimental protocol for execution.

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6127

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective
ML models
Beyond information retrieval, ML models excel in identifying patterns and assimilating latent knowledge to generalize predictions
about novel data.45,46 Existing ML models typically require
specialized models for each task and do not possess the
reasoning and interactive capabilities that distinguish AI agents.
An example is the AlphaFold,38 which predicts 3D protein structures with high accuracy using multi-sequence alignment with a
deep learning model but is tailored for protein folding. AI agents
represent an evolution in ML models, building on the foundations
of successes such as the transformer architecture47 and generative pretraining.8 These agents’ reasoning and interactive capabilities distinguish them from ML models, which typically require
specialized models for each task. Unlike traditional ML models,
agents assess the evolving environment, which is valuable for
modeling dynamic biological systems.
Interactive learning models
Interactive learning, often referred to as active learning48 and
reinforcement learning,49 represents a further advancement in
ML models by incorporating exploration mechanisms and human feedback. Active learning strategies can help build models
for datasets with small sample sizes when conventional ML
models might be insufficient due to limited statistical power. It
selectively queries the most informative data points for labeling
and optimizing the learning process, which improves how
models learn with data. Reinforcement learning involves an
agent learning how to act by observing the results of past actions
in an environment, mirroring the trial-and-error approach. In biological research, interactive learning has been used for small
molecule design,50 protein design,51,52 drug discovery,53,54
perturbation experiment design,55 and cancer screening.56 For
instance, GENTRL50 uses reinforcement learning to navigate
the chemical space and identify chemical compounds that can
act against biological targets. However, interactive models are
predominantly designed for narrow use cases and struggle to
generalize to new goals without retraining the models from
scratch. Leveraging interactive learning, AI agents achieve
greater autonomy in information retrieval tasks. Active learning
improves training efficiency through data labeling selected to
maximize model performance. However, AI agents extend
beyond this data-centric approach; for example, reinforcement
learning with human feedback (RLHF)49 uses a ‘‘reward model’’
to train an LLM-based agent with direct human feedback to understand human instruction naturally.
AI agents
Biomedical AI agents have advanced capabilities, including proactive information acquisition through perception modules,
interaction with tools, reasoning, and engaging with and learning
from their environments. Agents use external tools, such as lab
equipment, and have perception modules, such as integrated visual ML tools, to receive information from the environment.
Agents can incorporate search engines and ML tools and

Figure 2. Evolving use of data-driven models
Data-driven approaches, from databases and search engines, ML, and
interactive learning models to advanced agent systems, have reshaped

6128 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

biomedical research throughout the last several decades. Circles represent
studies focused predominantly on algorithmic ML innovation; diamonds are
used to indicate representative studies that used AI for biomedical discovery.

ll
Perspective
process information across data modalities via perception modules to generate hypotheses and refine them based on scientific
evidence.1,2
TYPES OF BIOMEDICAL AI AGENTS
The prevailing approach to building agents is to use LLMs, where
a single LLM is programmed to perform various roles. However,
beyond LLM agents, we envision multi-agent systems for discovery workflows that combine heterogeneous agents (Figure 1)
consisting of ML tools, domain-specific specialized tools, and
human experts. Given that much of biomedical research is not
text-based, such agents have broader applicability to biomedicine than LLM-based agents alone.
LLM-based AI agents
Programming a single LLM with diverse roles equips LLM-based
agents with conversational interfaces that emulate human
expertise and can access tools57,58 (Figure 3A). The rationale
behind this approach stems from pretraining an LLM to encode
general knowledge, followed by in-domain fine-tuning of the
LLM to encode domain-specific specialist knowledge, and aligning the LLM with human users through role-playing and conversation. Instruction tuning59 can be used for the former by training
the LLM to follow human instruction through prompt examples,
including dialogues that incorporate biological reasoning.60
Additionally, RLHF optimizes LLM performance by selecting
the most human-preferred outputs from a range of responses
to specific prompts, further aligning LLMs with human roles.
Consequently, a single LLM, programmed to fulfill multiple roles,
can provide a more practical and effective solution than developing specialized models. By assigning specific roles, the
agents can replicate the specialized knowledge of experts
across various fields, such as structural biology, genetics, and
chemistry, surpassing the capabilities of querying a non-specialized LLM61 and performing tasks previously not possible.62 Early
results in clinical medicine question-answering suggest that assigning specific roles, such as clinicians, to GPT-461 can achieve
better performance in terms of accuracy on multiple-choice
benchmarks compared with using domain-specialized LLMs
like BioGPT,63 NYUTron,64 and Med-PaLM.65,66
We envision three approaches for assigning roles to biological
AI agents: domain-specific fine-tuning, in-context learning, and
automatic generation of agentic roles. The first approach involves
instruction tuning an LLM across many biological tasks to ground
the LLM in the biological domain, followed by RLHF to ensure that
the tuned LLM performs tasks aligned with scientists’ goals and
needs. The second approach uses in-context learning of LLMs67
to process longer contextual information provided in inputs,
such as biologist-generated instructions, enabling agents to grasp
the domain context for each task. This approach is supported by
using textual prompts to define agent roles.62,68 Both strategies
require biologists to gather task-specific data or craft precise
prompts. However, since human-defined roles might not always
guide agents as intended, there is a growing shift toward granting
LLM-based agents greater autonomy in defining their roles. This
shift in role definition enables agents to autonomously generate
and refine role prompts and engage in self-directed learning and

OPEN ACCESS

role identification. For instance, an agent’s ability to evolve and
tailor its prompts in reaction to user inputs has been demonstrated
in Fernando et al.69 Additionally, self-referential learning frameworks can be employed to optimize prompt design when assigning roles to agents,70 enabling them to transition from task executors to entities capable of autonomous setup.
The agent system, comprising a single LLM prompted to
adopt various roles, has shown to be a valuable support tool in
scientific research. Studies suggest that agents set up to
perform specific roles exhibit enhanced capabilities compared
with either sequentially querying a single LLM or employing a single tool repetitively. A case in point is Coscientist,1 which shows
the potential of GPT-4-based agents for chemical research
tasks, including optimizing reactions for palladium-catalyzed
cross-couplings. Within Coscientist, GPT-4 undertakes the role
of a planner, serving as a research assistant. The agent uses
in-context prompts to use tools such as web and documentation
search and code execution via Python application programming
interface (API) and symbolic lab language (SLL).1 To complete
tasks that require access to a physical device, the planning agent
starts with a prompt provided by the scientist and uses search
tools to compile documentation for the experiment. Following
this, the agent generates SLL code and executes it, which entails
transferring it onto the device and controlling the device.
Multi-agent AI systems
LLM-based agents implemented through autoregressive LLM approaches acquire skills such as planning and reasoning by
emulating observed behaviors in training datasets. However,
this mimicry-based learning results in limited agent capabilities,
as they do not achieve a deep understanding of these behaviors.71
Consequently, a single agent often lacks the comprehensive skill
set needed to complete complex tasks. A practical alternative is
deploying a multi-agent AI system, wherein the task is segmented
into more manageable subtasks. This approach allows individual
agents to address specific subtasks efficiently, even with
incomplete capabilities. Distinct from single-LLM-based agents,
a multi-agent system incorporates several agents endowed with
specialized capabilities, tools, and domain-specific knowledge.
For successful task execution, these agents must conform to
working protocols. Such cooperative efforts equip LLMs with
unique roles, specialized knowledge bases, and varied toolsets,
simulating an interdisciplinary team of biology specialists. This
approach is akin to the diverse expertise found across departments within a university or an institute.
In the following, we introduce five collaborative designs for
multi-agent systems.
Brainstorming agents
Brainstorming research ideas with multiple agents (Figure 3B)
constitutes a collaborative session to generate a broad spectrum
of research concepts through the joint expertise of scientists and
agents. In such sessions, agents are prompted to contribute
ideas, prioritizing the volume of contributions over their initial
quality to foster creativity and innovation. This method encourages the proposal of unconventional and novel ideas, allowing
participants to build upon the suggestions of others to uncover
new avenues of inquiry while withholding judgment or critique.
The process enables agents to apply their domain knowledge

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6129

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective

Figure 3. Diverse configurations of AI agents in biomedicine—from an LLM-based AI agent to a multi-agent system with AI models, tools,
and integrated physical devices
(A) By programming an LLM with the role, one LLM-based agent, equipped with memory and reasoning abilities, performs multimodal perception and utilizes a
range of tools, e.g., web lab tools, to accomplish specified tasks.
(B–E) Leveraging AI agents equipped with diverse roles, perception modules, tools, and domain knowledge enables collaboration between agents and scientists.
This collaboration can adopt various configurations, such as expert consultation, debate, brainstorming, and roundtable discussions.
(F) Multi-agent systems can establish a self-driving laboratory wherein numerous agents collaborate on multiple iterations of biological research assisted by
humans. Each cycle of research encompasses the generation of hypotheses, the design of experiments, the execution of experiments both in silico and in vitro,
and the analysis of results.
Computing agent, AI agent that utilizes computational models as tools; decision agent, AI agent that makes decisions in response to given conditions; database
agent, AI agent that retrieves relevant information from databases; reasoning agent, AI agent capable of direct reasoning and reasoning with feedback; expert
agent, AI agent that provides professional consultation based on reliable sources, such as domain expertise, feedback from human experts, and the results of
specific tools; hypothesis agent, AI agent capable of reflective learning and reasoning to generate hypotheses; planner agent, AI agent that devises plans for
future actions; and in silico/vitro agent, AI agent that uses tools in silico or in vitro environment.

6130 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective
and resources to form a collective idea pool. Each agent would
provide insights and generate hypotheses based on their
specialized knowledge, which the group can then integrate
and refine. For example, in a multi-agent system designed for
Alzheimer’s research, agents could specialize in microglia
biology, neuronal degeneration, and neuroinflammation. To
explore new therapeutic targets for Alzheimer’s disease, an
agent specialized in microglia biology might propose investigating the role of microglial cells in synaptic pruning, while
another agent focused on neuronal degeneration could suggest
examining the protective effects of certain neurotrophic factors.
These diverse ideas are pooled together, allowing researchers to
explore a comprehensive range of potential research directions.
Expert consultation agents
Expert consultation (Figure 3C) entails soliciting expertise from individuals or entities with specialized knowledge. This process involves expert agents gathering information from various sources
and providing insights, solutions, decisions, or evaluations in
response. Other agents or humans then refine their approaches
based on this feedback. LLMs have the potential to assist in offering scientific critiques on research manuscripts, as demonstrated
in recent studies.72 However, LLMs lack the nuanced understanding of human reviewers and should be seen as complementary to,
not a replacement for, human expertise. Similarly, an AI agent
might consult another agent specialized in a specific area to refine
ideas within AI systems, mirroring the mentor-mentee dynamics
found in academic environments. In another example, in addressing Alzheimer’s and related dementias, diagnosing Alzheimer’s
based on cognitive criteria might present borderline cases.
Consulting an AI agent could offer additional perspectives, determining if such cases align with Alzheimer’s based on brain pathology or alternative biomarkers.
Research debate agents
In a research debate (Figure 3D), two teams of agents present
contrasting perspectives on a research topic, aiming to
persuade the agents of the opposing team. Agents are split
into two groups, each adopting distinct roles for the debate.
One group gathers evidence to fortify its position using various
knowledge sources and tools, while the opposing group critiques this evidence, striving to expose or neutralize its weaknesses with superior evidence. The objective for each faction
is to articulate their arguments more effectively than their rivals,
engaging in a systematic discourse to defend their viewpoint and
challenge the veracity of their adversaries’ assertions. This methodology promotes critical thinking and bolsters effective
communication as each team endeavors to construct the most
compelling argument supporting their stance.
Roundtable discussion agents
Roundtable discussions (Figure 3E) involve multiple agents
engaging in a process that fosters the expression of diverse
viewpoints to make collaborative decisions on the topics under
discussion. In such sessions, agents articulate their ideas and insights, pose questions, and provide feedback on others’ contributions. They then respond to these queries, refine their initial
propositions based on feedback, or attempt to persuade their
peers. This method promotes equal participation among all
agents, urging them to contribute their expertise and perspectives, offer constructive criticism, question underlying assump-

tions, and suggest amendments to improve the proposed solutions. Reconcile73 implements a multi-agent collaborative
framework where multiple LLM-based agents engage in several
rounds of dialogue to reach a consensus on research questions.
Agents attempt to convince each other to adjust their responses
and use a confidence-weighted voting mechanism to achieve a
more accurate consensus than if a single LLM-based agent is
used. During each discussion round, Reconcile orchestrates
the interaction between agents using a ‘‘discussion prompt,’’
which includes grouped answers and explanations produced
by each agent in the preceding round, their confidence levels,
and examples of human explanations for correcting answers.
Self-driving lab agents
The self-driving laboratory (Figure 3F) is a multi-agent system
where the end-to-end discovery workflow is iteratively optimized
under the broad direction of scientists but without requiring stepby-step human oversight.74 Once the agent system is trained, it
can describe experiments necessary to test the generated hypotheses, analyze the results of said experiments, and use
them to improve its internal scientific knowledge models. Agents
in the self-driving system need to address the following three elements: determine inductive biases to reduce the search space
of hypotheses, implement methods to rank order hypotheses
considering their potential biomedical value with experimental
cost, characterize skepticism via uncertainty quantification and
analysis of experiments in reference to the original hypothesis,
and refine hypotheses using data and counterexamples from experiments.75 Ideally, hypothesis agents are creative and reflective when developing biological hypotheses that extrapolate indirectly from the existing body of knowledge.16 There is emerging
evidence that generative models have the potential to generate
novel hypotheses. Tshitoyan et al.76 demonstrated that using
latent knowledge from published materials science literature
can recommend novel materials. GPTChem77 leveraged LLMs
trained with an autoregressive pretraining objective to predict
molecules. Experimental agents steer operational agents that
use a combination of in silico approaches and physical platforms
to execute experiments. Reasoning agents integrate the latest results to guide future experimental design. The utility of experimental results, such as the yield of high-throughput screening
of a chemical library against a biological target, can be compared
for different versions of the agent system given a time budget for
hypothesis and experiment generation.
LEVELS OF AUTONOMY IN AI AGENTS
When integrated with experimental platforms, AI agents can operate at varying levels of autonomy tailored to diverse requirements across biomedicine. We classify these AI agents into
four levels according to their proficiency in hypothesis generation, experimental design and execution, and reasoning (Table 1).
Specific capabilities within each area define these levels, necessitating that agents exhibit the capabilities for a given level
across all areas (an agent with level 3 capabilities in the experiment area but only level 2 capabilities in Reasoning and Hypothesis areas would be classified as level 2).
Level 0, denoted as ‘‘no AI agent,’’ uses ML models as tools
coordinated by interactive and foundation learning models. At

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6131

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective

Table 1. Levels of autonomy in AI agents
Autonomy levels

Hypothesis generation

Experimental design

Reasoning

Human-AI collaboration

Level 0: no
AI agents

none

ML models perform
predefined tasks,
with no adaptive
changes to the protocols

none

scientist defines the
hypothesis and sometimes
uses the output of ML
models to help with hypothesis
generation; scientist
defines the task to test
hypothesis; scientist
completes tasks

Level 1: AI agents AI agent formulates
as assistants
simple and narrow
hypotheses that are
a direct composition
of existing knowledge,
preliminary data,
or observations

narrow design of
experimental protocols
and utilization of in silico
and experimental tools

strong reasoning in a
selected task; multimodal
summary of findings;
use of experimental
data and existing
knowledge

scientist defines the
hypothesis; scientist
defines the series of
tasks to test hypothesis;
AI agent completes tasks

Level 2: AI agents AI agent generates
as collaborators
hypotheses that are
an explicit continuation
of data trends and
known literature

design of rigorous experimental
protocols and adept utilization
of a broad range of ex silico
tools; once data are collected,
employ statistical and
computational methods to
analyze the results and
interpret the data to determine
whether it supports or refutes
the hypothesis

interpreting findings within
existing knowledge,
considering alternative
explanations, and assessing
the reliability and validity
of the findings; synthesis
of concepts beyond a
summary of findings;
collaborating with other
researchers and undergoing
peer review to validate
findings and ensure that
conclusions are robust
and credible

scientist proposes initial
hypothesis and refines
hypothesis together with AI agent;
AI agent defines the series
of tasks to test hypothesis;
AI agent completes tasks

Level 3: AI agents AI agent generates
as scientists
creative, de novo
hypotheses that are
indirect extrapolations
from existing
knowledge

development of experimental
methods unlocking new
capabilities; actively gathering
data through experiments
or simulations
using various techniques and
tools to measure and record
biological phenomena

based on the results and
interpretations, refine
experimental approaches
for continuous learning and
adaptation to improve the
accuracy and depth of
understanding; find concise,
informative and clear
conceptual links between
findings

scientist and AI agent
together form hypothesis;
AI agent defines the series
of tasks to test hypothesis;
AI agent completes tasks

AI agents are characterized by four levels of autonomy in biological research, which are defined based on the capabilities of AI agents to complete
different steps of the discovery process. At level 0, there is no AI agent, and ML is used as a tool. Level 1 consists of AI agents as research assistants,
where agents complete a set of narrow and specific tasks defined by scientists. At level 2, AI agents act as collaborators and can use a broad set of
tools to identify scientific discoveries. Still, they can only generate hypotheses that are a linear continuation of literature. Finally, at level 3, AI agents act
similarly to human scientists across several axes of human evaluation, capable of identifying and understanding pioneering discoveries and extrapolating novel hypotheses that cannot be derived from existing knowledge.

this level, ML models do not independently formulate testable
and falsifiable statements78 as hypotheses. Instead, model outputs help scientists to form precise hypotheses. For example, a
study employed AlphaFold-Multimer to predict interactions of
‘‘DONSON,’’ a protein with limited understanding, leading to a
hypothesis about its functions.79 Level 1, termed ‘‘AI agent as
a research assistant,’’ features scientists setting hypotheses,
specifying necessary tasks to achieve objectives, and assigning
specific functions to agents. These agents work with a restricted
range of tools and multimodal data to execute these tasks.
For instance, ChemCrow2 combines chain-of-thought (CoT)

6132 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

reasoning80 with ML tools to support tasks in organic chemistry,
identifying and summarizing literature to inform experiments. In
another example, AutoBa81 automates multi-omic analyses.
These two agents are designed for narrow scientific domains;
ChemCrow and AutoBa optimize and execute actions to complete tasks that are designed and predefined by scientists. Level
1 agents2,81–83 formulate simple hypotheses inferred from existing knowledge and utilize a limited set of tools, lacking the capacity necessary to achieve level 2 autonomy.
At level 2, ‘‘AI agent as a collaborator,’’ the role of AI expands
as scientists and agents collaboratively refine hypotheses.

ll
Perspective
Agents undertake tasks critical for hypothesis testing, using a
wider array of ML and experimental tools for scientific discovery.76 However, their capability to understand scientific phenomena and generate innovative hypotheses remains constrained,
highlighting a linear progression from existing studies. The transition to level 3, or ‘‘AI agent as a scientist,’’ marks a major evolution, with agents capable of developing and extrapolating hypotheses beyond the scope of prior research, synthesizing
concepts beyond summarizing findings and establishing
concise, informative, and clear conceptual links between findings that cannot be inferred from literature alone, eventually
yielding a new scientific understanding. While multiple level 1
agents exist across various scientific fields, levels 2 and 3 agents
have yet to be realized. Existing taxonomies of autonomy focus
on the division of responsibilities between AI agents and humans, with no consideration of biomedical discovery. These taxonomies were developed with the goal of advancing artificial
general intelligence to surpass human performance across
different skill levels, rather than being tailored to scientific
research.84
As the level of autonomy increases, so does the potential for
misuse and the risk of scientists becoming overly reliant on AI
agents. While agents have the potential to enhance scientific
integrity, there are concerns regarding their use in identifying
hazardous substances or controlled substances.85 Responsible development of agents requires developing preventive
measures.86,87 The responsible deployment of agents must
account for the risk of over-reliance, particularly in light of
evidence that LLMs can produce convincing but misleading
claims and spread misinformation. The risks will likely increase as agents undertake more autonomous research
activities. Agents must be scrutinized as scientists, including
reproducibility and rigorous peer review of agentic research.
We illustrate these definitions of levels by giving examples in
genetics, cell biology, and chemical biology (Table 2). We
selected these areas because of the availability of large datasets that have recently driven the development and application
of ML models. Key ML and biological terms are described in
Tables 3 and 4.
Illustration of AI agents in genetics
Research in human genetics seeks to understand the impact of
DNA sequence variation on human traits. LLM-based agents
operating at level 1 would perform specific tasks relevant to genetic studies. For instance, in a genome-wide association study
(GWAS), a level 1 agent can write bioinformatics code to process genotype data to (1) execute quality control measures,
such as the removal of single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) missing in many individuals or control for population
stratification,88 (2) estimate ungenotyped SNPs through imputation, and (3) conduct the appropriate statistical analyses to identify relevant SNPs, taking into account the false discovery
rate.89 Following the analysis, the level 1 agent reviews and reports findings, including any filtered SNPs and rationales for
their exclusion.
Instead of executing narrow tasks following human instruction,
a level 2 agent identifies and executes tasks independently to
refine a hypothesis initially given by the scientist. For example,

OPEN ACCESS

it may explore the effectiveness of drugs for a patient subgroup
within complex diseases, where genetic underpinnings can influence drug response.90 Given a hypothesis that a particular drug
is effective in a subset of patients with idiopathic or genetic
generalized epilepsy (GGE)—a condition with a robust genetic
causality91—a level 2 agent would synthesize genetic information from GWAS meta-analyses,92 such as the UK Biobank,93
targeted sequencing studies,94 and knowledge bases like Genes4Epilepsy.95 The agent identifies GGE subtypes and causal
genes by analyzing patient genetic data, predicting which subgroups might benefit from the drug based on genetic markers.
It would then conduct in vitro functional studies to confirm these
predictions, ultimately presenting evidence on how the drug
could benefit GGE patient subpopulations by synthesizing concepts beyond summarizing findings.
Level 3 agents coordinate a system of agents (Figure 3) to
discover and evaluate gene markers for specific phenotypes.
These agents help initiate new study groups and optimize noninvasive methods of DNA collection for cost-effectiveness and
recruitment processes.96 Once data are collected, the agents
innovate statistical methods to identify causal variants from
genotypic data amidst confounders such as linkage disequilibrium97 and develop in vitro techniques for validating candidate
gene markers in disease models. Level 3 agents collaborate
with scientists to generate and test hypotheses for comprehensive genetic insights.
Illustration of AI agents in cell biology
Cells are fundamental units of study in cell biology. Advances in
single-cell omics, super-resolution microscopy, and gene
editing have generated datasets on normal and perturbed
cells, covering areas such as multi-omics,98–100 cell viability,101
morphology,102 cryoelectron microscopy and tomography,103,104 and multiplexed spatial proteomics.105,106 This proliferation of data has spurred interest in in silico cell modeling.107
ML tools have been instrumental in analyzing data across
these cellular modalities, but as level 0 agents, they lack autonomous research capabilities. At level 1, agents integrate specialized level 0 models to assist in hypothesis testing. These agents
actively assist scientists in developing hypotheses by synthesizing literature and predicting cellular responses using integrated
models. For example, to help investigate the resistance mechanism of a compound, level 1 agents predict its effects in various
cellular contexts.108 These predictions also inform experimental
design, such as spatial transcriptomic109 and proteomic110,111
screening. Agents then retrieve and refine experimental protocols for execution on platforms112 and apply predefined bioinformatics pipelines, as instructed by scientists.
Level 2 agents execute predefined tasks and generate hypotheses on cellular functions and responses. They autonomously
define and refine tasks to support scientific reasoning, enabling
practical exploration of complex phenotypes like drug resistance. By managing the experimental cycle and continuously updating their in silico tools, level 2 agents actively optimize experiments to focus on key variables of resistance based on a
synthesis of predictive content, uncertainty, and newly acquired
data, with iterative feedback from scientists.55 Level 2 agents
thus form a prototype for a virtual cell model capable of

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6133

Autonomy levels

Genetics (mutational effect modeling)

Cell biology (drug resistance)

Chemical biology (binder design)

Level 0

statistical package to analyze a preselected GWAS study

use of ML tools for modeling cellular
outcomes of drug perturbations, including
cell imaging, omics, and viability

use of ML tools for protein structure
prediction, molecular docking, and
generative models for binder design

Level 1

to explore potential mutational associations
with disease, writes bioinformatics software
for quality control and statistical analysis of
genotype data from pre-fetched relevant
GWAS studies

integrates multimodal (imaging, omics, and
viability) and multiscale (cellular, tissue)
data to create in silico models of drug
resistance; retrieves and executes existing
experimental protocols to study resistance;
analyzes raw image and omics data with
predefined pipelines

studies a specific protein target, integrates
ML tools, such as AlphaFold for structure
prediction and neural networks for
screening chemical libraries to find
candidate chemical compounds to bind to
the target

Level 2

selects GWAS studies relevant to a
provided hypothesis; if none exists, it
designs and executes its own study or pulls
other relevant genomic data to investigate
the hypothesis

autonomously develops and adaptively
refines hypotheses about resistance
mechanisms based on knowledge and
real-time experimental data analytics;
designs and executes scalable and costeffective experimental protocols with
experts in the loop

designs binders for more challenging
targets; identifies scaffolds that bind to
similar pockets and adapts them for the
target; synthesizes and tests molecules
using existing experimental techniques

Level 3

initiates genomic studies and optimizes
non-invasive methods of DNA collection for
cost-effectiveness and ease of participant
requirement; innovates statistical methods
to identify causal variants from genotypic
data and develops in vitro techniques for
validating candidate gene markers in
disease models

proactively identifies critical unresolved
problems in drug resistance, proposing
innovative therapeutic strategies; performs
in silico simulations of cellular dynamics in
tumor contexts and under complex
perturbations (combinatorial genetic and
chemical perturbations under different
dosing schedules); develops novel highly
multiplexed in vivo single-cell spatial
technologies, enabling live tracking of gene
expression, molecular interactions, and
cell-cell interactions during resistance
evolution

proposes de novo binders for an
undruggable target or a poorly studied
target; designs in situ experiments to study
molecular interactions; synthesizes
molecules with more complex pathways
and designs and executes assays to test
efficacy

ll

OPEN ACCESS

6134 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

Table 2. Examples of levels of autonomy of AI agents in genetics, cell biology, and chemical biology

Perspective

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective
Table 3. Glossary of key machine learning terms
Term

Description

Multimodal foundation model

advanced algorithms trained on multimodal datasets that can process various
data types, including text, images, biological sequences, and high-dimensional
tabular readouts; this training allows them to perform a broad array of tasks through
few-shot fine-tuning and prompting across domains with little to no additional training

Transformer architecture

deep learning model architecture that uses on self-attention mechanism to capture
long-range dependencies in input sequence data

Large language model

machine learning model with parameters on the scale of billions, trained on vast
amounts of text data to understand, generate, and interact with human language
on a large scale

Generative pretraining

strategy for training a machine learning model in an autoregressive manner to
predict the next token from given data tokens, facilitating a general understanding
of data sequence likelihoods

LLM-based AI agent

AI system capable of solving complex tasks within its environment by equipping
large language model with modules for perception, interaction, memory, and reasoning

Embodied AI agent

AI agent system that interacts with the physical world through a body; the embodiment
enables the agent to learn and adapt from sensory feedback and physical interactions

Fine-tuning

a training process of making small adjustments to a pre-trained machine learning
model to improve its accuracy on a specific task or dataset

Instruction tuning

a training strategy that fine-tunes a model using a dataset of instructions and corresponding
outputs to enhance its ability to follow specific instructions

Reinforcement learning
with human feedback

a reinforcement learning strategy where an action model learns to perform tasks by
receiving feedback from a reward model that mimics human preferences, guiding it
to align with desired human behaviors

Prompting

techniques that provide specific text or other modal input instructions to guide the
model in responding toward a desired output direction

Cross-modal alignment

a training scheme to align the representation embeddings of models
across various modalities

In-context learning

ability to perform new tasks based on a handful of examples provided within the
contextual prompt, without requiring explicit model training

Retrieval-augmented generation

techniques that make generative models to produce contextually relevant text by
retrieving pertinent information and using it to inform the generation process

hypothesis generation, encompassing closed-loop integration of
digital and experimental platforms.
Level 3 agents respond to existing challenges and anticipate future directions in cell biology research. They form
hybrid virtual cell models by combining AI tools (digital agents)
with high-throughput platforms (experimental agents). Digital
agents, such as LLM-based agents, autonomously identify
critical knowledge gaps through literature synthesis based
on criteria such as data volume, biological relevance, and clinical needs and simulate any perturbagen (extrinsic events
such as gene knockouts and overexpression, compounds,
cell-cell interactions; intrinsic events such as cell cycle) in
any context. Experimental agents not only optimize experimental protocols102,113,114 to enable high-throughput multimodal measurements but also develop transformative technologies to enable probing at unprecedented resolution
across space and time across in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo
models, uncovering pioneering insights. The ability of level 3
agents to drive the discovery of biological mechanisms and
therapeutic strategies shifts the role of scientists from conducting operational tasks to focusing on ideation and managing hybrid cell models.

Illustration of AI agents in chemical biology
A major focus for chemical biology is understanding molecular
interactions within cells to manipulate biological systems at molecular and cellular levels. An AI agent could analyze any molecular interaction, help design new drugs, and provide more valuable chemical probes for biological systems.
Despite considerable advances in applying ML to chemical
biology, current approaches fall in level 0. Scientists oversee
all activities by integrating ML tools for structure prediction,
docking, chemical synthesis, and molecular generation. At level
1, the agent has elementary reasoning of chemical biology and
can execute simple tasks autonomously, such as running ML
tools or designing experiments for a given objective. However,
due to limited reasoning capabilities, the agent may fail to explain
more complex concepts, such as how the dynamics of molecules may influence the effects of drugs on binders or explore
novel molecular scaffolds. For a level 2, the long-term objective
is its function as a collaborator for scientists through excelling at
tasks that are explicit continuations of existing scientific
research, such as improving the efficiency of chemical probes,
autonomously designing and testing de novo enzymes, or
designing new binders by leveraging trends in related targets.

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6135

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective

Table 4. Glossary of key biological terms
Term

Description

Linkage
disequilibrium

a phenomenon in which two alleles occur so
often in proximity in the chromosome that
their association cannot be random

Single-nucleotide
polymorphisms

genetic variation consisting of the
replacement of a single nucleotide in the
DNA sequence

Genome-wide
association study

approach that identifies genetic variations
across the entire genome associated with a
specific disease or complex trait

Pharmacogenetics

field of research that aims to understand
individuals’ responses to different drugs
based on their genetic factors

Experiment in vitro

procedures and investigations that occur
within a laboratory environment (e.g., in a
test tube) and outside of living organisms

In silico modeling

the use of computers to build simulations or
experiments that recreate complex
biological phenomena to be able to study
and predict specific behaviors; for example,
modeling of molecular dynamics

Mass spectrometry

analytical tools to characterize and identify
individual molecules based on specific
properties (e.g., mass-to-charge ratio)

Molecular docking

computational simulation tools used to
predict how ligands bind to receptors

Retro-synthesis

techniques to design the synthesis of
complex molecules by starting from the
target and moving back to the original
compounds

Crystallography

field of science studying the structure of
atoms and molecules in crystals, which are
solid materials whose compounds are
ordered according to a very regular and
ordered arrangement

Cryoelectron
microscopy

imaging techniques used to identify the 3D
structure of bio-molecules with near-atomic
resolution without the need for extensive
sample preparation and with the overall
preservation of the sample

Single-cell
RNA sequencing

high-throughput method that isolates
individual cells and sequences their mRNA
to measure gene expression levels of
individual cells

Single-cell ATAC
sequencing

high-throughput method that isolates
individual cells and sequences their
accessible chromatin to measure chromatin
accessibility levels of individual cells

Level 2 AI agents have deeper expertise in more domains, such
as retro-synthesis, crystallography, bioassays, and directing robotic arms to conduct research.
The goal of a level 3 agent in chemical biology is the ability to
study all types of molecular interactions in a cell. This agent
would work alongside human scientists to explore research
questions that are challenging for the field, such as binder design
for undruggable targets,115 significantly improving specificity

6136 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

and efficiency of in vivo bioorthogonal reactions, or developing
new chemical probes that can access new spatial and temporal
scales. Unlike the level 2 agent’s use of well-established protocols, a level 3 agent aims to unlock experimental capabilities
that are not currently accessible. For example, AI agents could
be tasked to probe molecular dynamics at longer timescales
than what is currently accessible. At this level, agents have a
thorough understanding of existing literature and work alongside
scientists to unlock new fields of chemical biology.
ROADMAP FOR BUILDING AI AGENTS
An AI agent is built as a compound system that consists of modules3,57,58 each implementing a distinct functionality. Here, we
describe these modules (Figure 4), focusing on perception, interaction, memory, and reasoning modules necessary for AI agents
to interact with humans and engage with experimental environments. Interactions between the agent and its environment are
characterized by two elements: the agent’s perception of its surroundings and its subsequent engagement with them. Perception modules enable the agent to interpret and assimilate information from various data modalities. Then, learning and
memory allow agents to interact with an environment and complete tasks by acquiring new knowledge and retrieving previously learned ones. Finally, the reasoning module processes information and executes action plans. Using a published study as
an example,116 Figure 5E illustrates a hypothetical AI agent that
sets up experiments to study the selective removal of mitochondrial DNA in Drosophila through perception, interaction, memory,
and reasoning modules.
The division of research into smaller tasks handled by AI
agents presents an intriguing approach, building on the success
of modular and sequential bioinformatics workflows like Snakemake and Docker. Unlike these workflows, which are often static
and require manual updates and reconfiguration to handle new
tasks or integrate new tools, AI agents are dynamic and operate
in a personalized, user-specific, and context-appropriate
manner. They can learn to use new tools and adjust their workflows based on the specific instructions and needs of the scientist. Further, the adaptive allocation of tasks by AI agents can be
helpful in automatically incorporating new tools and restructuring
existing pipelines, much like a human researcher would. For
example, AI agents could experiment with and create new protocols beyond the currently established methods in integrating
multimodal omics data. For instance, while established protocols for integrating multimodal, such as single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq) with scATAC-seq or spatial data, exist,
AI agents could develop new pipelines for multimodal integrations beyond the three modalities, or multiscale integrations
such as atlas-scale single-cell and bulk RNA-seq data, or normal
and disease state data from cell lines, organoids, and patient
samples, based on their initial attempts.
Perception modules
Perception modules equip LLM-based agents with the capability
to understand and interact with elements in the environment in
which they operate, such as biological workflows and human
users. For perception, agents need to integrate abilities to

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective

Figure 4. Key modules in AI agents: perception, interaction, reasoning, and memory modules
Perception interprets multimodal environmental data. Interaction facilitates engagement with the environment, encompassing human-agent interactions, multiagent interactions, and tool use. Memory is responsible for the storage and retrieval of knowledge, while learning focuses on the acquisition and updating of
knowledge. Reasoning, with or without environmental feedback, plays a crucial role in planning and decision-making processes. Cross-modal alignment is a key
technique for the perception of LLM-based agents, where inputs from different modalities are aligned within a text-centered representation space. This alignment
enables the LLM to perceive and process various input modalities. Reasoning patterns for AI agents indicate transitions between reasoning thoughts. For
instance, agents with a chain-of-thought pattern generate reasoning in a step-by-step manner.

receive feedback from multiple sources: scientists,49 the environment,62 and other AI agents.13,117 This requires accommodating a diverse array of modalities. These include text descriptions6; images from light and cryoelectron microscopy to
assess cellular processes across many conditions simultaneously103,104,118; videos from live imaging to assess developmental processes or animal behaviors across time119; longitudinal biosensor readouts and genomics profiles of cells120; mass
spectrometry-based proteomics to decipher protein homeostasis24,121; and miniaturized platforms for conducting biochemical
assays and 3D culture systems that mimic the physiological
context of organ systems.112

AI agents can take different approaches to interacting with
environments. The most direct one involves using natural language, which represents a common perception modality for
LLM-based agents. Other techniques involve multimodal
perception modules, where agents process multimodal data
streams from the environment or align multimodal inputs with
text-based LLMs.
Conversational modules
With the rise of ChatGPT, the ability of AI agents to interpret natural language has reached such a high level49 that it is now
possible to build interfaces to agent systems that are entirely
based on natural language with limited misinterpretations. The

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6137

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective

Figure 5. Illustration of components in biomedical AI agents
(A) Use of a short-term memory module to recall previous relevant experiments for small molecule inhibitor design.
(B) Use of a long-term memory module to retrieve relevant information for target prioritization for a disease.
(C) Use of direct reasoning without scientist feedback to prioritize genes for downstream phenotype analyses.
(D) Use of reasoning with feedback from scientists to select and optimize an alternative experimental approach.
(E) Combining perception, interaction, memory, and reasoning modules to study the selection against pathogenic mitochondrial DNA in the germline.

main focus is chat interfaces that preserve conversational history
in a scrolling window, where users can converse with agents in a
manner that resembles the standard approach of written humanto-human interaction. This approach allows scientists to express

6138 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

their queries using their language, promoting initiative and
enabling them to precisely describe what they want. We envision
that agents will maintain a history of interaction with scientists
using natural language, which, in turn, will allow us to keep track

ll
Perspective
of scientific interactions with agents.62,68 Combining traces of
these interactions with RAG, we can develop personalized discovery workflows tailored to individual scientists.
Multimodal perception modules
Agents align LLMs with other data types to fuse data modalities
beyond natural language text. This approach helps agents better
model the changing environment in which the agent acts and
dynamically adjust its outputs to new situations, such as evolved
biological states in a virtual cell model. The alignment process involves two main strategies: textual translation and representation alignment. Textual translation converts inputs into a textual
format, such as transforming data from robotics into textual descriptions that log environmental states.9 For example, when
handling readouts from experimental devices, the readouts
can be combined with a textual description of their meaning, allowing the LLM to understand the readouts as a new modality.
Alternatively, through representation alignment, data from
different modalities are analyzed by modality-specific models
to generate representations, such as using the visual encoder
from CLIP122 for visual information processing. These representations are then aligned with LLM textual representations
through instruction tuning,118,123 enabling agents powered by
LLMs to perceive and interpret multimodal data. For instance,
to make LLM-based agents handle the protein structure data,
an additional encoder is required to encode the protein structure
data into a representation aligned with the LLMs’ representation
space. This encoder is pre-trained with modality-specific
training schemes, and an adaptor is placed between this
encoder and LLMs to align the representations of the two modalities. Then, instruction tuning is applied using data containing
both modalities to train the adaptor for alignment. An alternative
to alignment involves allowing the agents to receive input expressed in different modalities.7,124 For instance, Fuyu124 uses
a decoder-only transformer architecture to process image
patches and text tokens jointly. Similarly, Gemini7 is engineered
to handle visual, audio, and text inputs within a single model.
Once perception modules are implemented for agents to receive
inputs from the environment, modules for interaction and
reasoning follow to process the inputs and interact externally.
Training agents with strong perception abilities on biomedical
data requires extensive, high-quality data pairs that align multiple modalities. However, collecting such data remains challenging. For example, multimodal experimental platforms are
non-existent or have low-throughput yields, certain tissues and
cell types are not experimentally available, and a long tail of disease phenotypes has small sample sizes, making data collection
infeasible.
Interaction modules
Beyond conversational modules, scientists use ML-based and
other tools in biological research, explore datasets through
graphical user interfaces (GUIs) to analyze and visualize data,
and engage with physical equipment and wet lab experimental
platforms. Chat-optimized LLM-based agents thus need interaction capabilities to communicate and collaborate with scientists,
other AI agents, and tools to function beyond a simple chatbot.
Agents must incorporate essential interaction modules to
interact with elements in the environment. These include

OPEN ACCESS

agent-human interaction to support communication with scientists and following human instruction,125,126 multi-agent interaction for collaboration among agents, and tool-use action to access ML tools and experimental platforms.
Interactive abilities of LLMs, when combined with function
calling, can act as an intermediary between scientists and the
agent’s interface, as well as between scientists and other functional items, such as tools and other agents. This approach allows scientists to express their intentions in natural language
without needing to search for how and where to accomplish
tasks. At the same time, the advantages of functional items are
preserved because agents can interact with tools and use
them to provide feedback. However, interactive modules trained
on general, non-biological domains might not be well-suited for
specialized biomedical terminologies, requiring in-domain
training on biomedical tools.
Agent-human interaction modules
The interaction between scientists and AI agents synchronizes
scientific objectives with AI agents through cooperative communication and modeling of biological knowledge. Natural language
processing and human evaluation methods are predominantly
used to develop this interaction capability. InstructGPT49 enhances the GPT model through supervised fine-tuning with examples of human dialogues to improve the model’s conversational skills. The alignment between agents and humans can
be refined through RLHF, which adjusts the model based on a
reward model trained using human assessments of the model’s
responses. Alternatively, RLHF can be replaced by direct preference optimization,127 which is a parameterized method that provides a more consistent and efficient alignment with human preferences. Through agent-human interaction, agents become
attuned to human needs and preferences,10,126 using human
insight as a directive for carrying out complex tasks.13 For
instance, Inner Monologue126 employs human feedback to
discern user preferences or interpret ambiguous requests in an
embodied context. In AutoGPT,10 humans formulate tasks and
score solutions returned by agents, and AutoGen13 can use human expertise to solve tasks better than agents alone.
Multi-agent interaction
Multi-agent interactions support solving complex goals that
agents could not complete if they operated independently. In
such interdisciplinary systems, agents that could specialize in
different biological domains, each with distinct capabilities,
engage in interactions through various communication means.
Language has emerged as the predominant medium for multiagent interactions due to the ability of agents to communicate
with humans linguistically.4,13,73,117,128 An instance of this is generative agents,62 which create interactive environments where
agents mimic human behavior and interact using natural language.
Different strategies are used for multi-agent interaction, including
cooperation129–131 and negotiation.73,132,133 For example,
MetaGPT130 applies standardized operating procedures from human teamwork to define tasks and agent responsibilities.
Through these approaches, agent interactions make it
possible to tackle tasks that are too complex for just one agent
to handle.82,134 MedAgent82 leverages the expertise of multiple
medical AI agents for medical reasoning. Similarly, RoCo134 employs robot agents with varied roles to accomplish complex

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6139

ll
OPEN ACCESS

tasks in the physical world. Multi-agent interaction can also
boost the proficiency of less skilled agents by allowing them to
learn from more experienced counterparts.135 These interactions also enable the creation of simulations for a variety of environments, ranging from public health scenarios136 to human social behaviors,62,137 enhancing the system’s adaptability and
application in diverse contexts.
Tool use
To manage tasks from diverse environments, agents require
tools to boost their capabilities.138 Commonly used tools are
application APIs,139 search engines,140 ML models,141 knowledge DBs,142 and robotic machinery for physical tasks.9,143,144
Level 1 agent systems have been developed that can interact
with one or more types of tools. ChemCrow2 leverages chemical
tools and search engines to address chemical challenges.
WebGPT140 can conduct searches and navigate web browsing
environments. SayCan144 controls a robot in the physical world
using an LLM to complete tasks. To invoke these tools, AI agents
generate commands in specific formats139,141,142 or query pretrained control models to execute actions.144,145 To develop
these capabilities, agents can use in-context learning141 or
fine-tuning with tool-use demonstrations,139 where the latter
represents a more sophisticated approach.
For in-context learning, it is necessary to include system abilities in the prompt so the agent can use function calling to query
tools. For example, HuggingGPT141 uses ChatGPT as a
controller to integrate all ML models on Hugging Face through
in-context learning. The alternative approach consists of using
model fine-tuning with function calling to create an LLM-based
agent with integrated abilities of a function/tool. For instance,
Toolformer139 introduces a self-supervised learning method to
master the use of tools’ APIs with minimal demonstrations for
each API.
By modeling scientists’ needs by analyzing natural language
textual inputs, AI agents can select the most likely available
tool, identify the desired user interface component, and
execute the scientist’s expected actions. Interaction modules
are designed to be integrated and adapted to suit changing environments. For level 2 and level 3 agents, agents autonomously learn new types of interactions and how/when to start
using new tools.
Memory and learning modules
When using tools and ML models for biological research, scientists keep records of experimental logs and plan their next steps
based on them. In AI agents, memory modules alleviate the need
for manual log recording by memorizing necessary experimental
outputs. Contrary to ML models that perform one-time inference
to generate predictions, memory modules in LLM-based agents
store and recall information. This is necessary for executing
complex tasks and adapting to new or evolving environments.
Memory modules are designed to store long-term and shortterm learned knowledge. As agents encounter new situations
and acquire data, memory modules get updated with new information.
Long-term memory modules
Long-term memory stores essential and factual knowledge that
underpins agent behavior and understanding of the world,

6140 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

Perspective
ensuring this information persists beyond task completion. This
memory can be internal, encoded within the model’s weights via
learning processes,8,146 or external, maintained in auxiliary knowledge bases.147,148 Internal memory is directly used for accomplishing zero-shot tasks6,7 while accessing external memory requires actions by the agent to fetch and integrate data into
short-term memory for immediate use.149,150 For instance,
ChatDB142 uses an external DB for memory storage, and
MemoryBank151 encodes memory segments into embeddings
for later retrieval. Agents can query knowledge banks, such as a
GWAS DB to find genetic evidence for a candidate protein target,
a knowledge base of therapeutic mechanisms of action, and scientific literature with up-to-date information for the agent to integrate and decide whether the protein can be modulated through
a therapeutic perturbation (Figure 5B). The learning process updates long-term memory by adding new knowledge or replacing
outdated information. Internal memory of an agent can be updated using parameter-efficient fine-tuning,146,152 interactive
learning,49 and model editing.153 These strategies must be effective for large models152 and avoid the loss of previously learned information.154 On the other hand, updating external memory is
more straightforward, involving modifications to the knowledge
base.142,151 For example, in drug discovery, updating long-term
memory by adding a new compound in development to the
drug bank is a convenient way to maintain an up-to-date agent.
Short-term memory modules
AI agents use short-term memory to temporarily store information during their interactions. This short-term memory is enabled
through in-context learning, where relevant information is integrated as context prompts144,155 or via latent embeddings118,123
in LLMs. For chatbots, previous conversations are kept as text
prompts, supporting multiple rounds of dialogue.49,156 The
text-based approach lays the groundwork for communication
in multi-agent73,133 and agent-human scenarios.10,13 In
embodied AI agents, environmental feedback144,155 is captured
in textual format, acting as a short-term memory that aids
reasoning. Following perception, multimodal inputs are converted into latent embeddings, which function as short-term
memory. LLaVA118 uses latent embeddings generated by visual
encoders to retain visual information. Short-term memory allows
agents to temporarily acquire skills, such as tool usage,139,141
store information about recent states of a biological system,155,156 and keep track of outcomes from earlier reasoning efforts.11 This learning mechanism is crucial for agents to learn and
apply new knowledge under new conditions. Moreover, shortterm memory can temporarily override long-term memory, allowing agents to precede recent information over older knowledge
within their model weights.157 Agents can be informed by past
experiences stored in their short-term memory to tell which experiments to run in the future. In Figure 5A, we detail an example
where the agent recalls experiments for a similar protein to
inform the initial inhibitor design for the given protein.
Reasoning modules
Biological research involves a multidisciplinary and multistage
process that integrates the expertise of scientists from various
disciplines. Scientists formulate hypotheses, design experiments
based on these hypotheses, interpret the results, and plan the

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective
next steps. The integration of reasoning capabilities in AI agents
can assist biological research throughout this process. Reasoning
improves agents’ capabilities to plan experiments, make decisions on biological hypotheses, and resolve competing candidate
biological mechanisms. AI agents that use LLMs can implement
interactive dialogue systems to explain ML models through natural language conversations. Reasoning modules can be implemented using prompting158 and few-shot in-context learning.80
Additionally, agents can use planner models159,160 and action
models.155 We classify reasoning modules into two categories:
direct reasoning and reasoning with feedback, depending on
whether agents adjust their plan in response to experimental or
human feedback.
Direct reasoning modules
In direct reasoning, an agent performs planning and reasoning
based on the current state of the environment, which can follow
different reasoning patterns, such as single-path and multi-path
reasoning. Single-path reasoning involves the agent breaking
down the task into multiple recursive steps.161 For instance,
CoT reasoning allows agents to reason step-by-step either by
using in-context examples80 or by applying a zeroshot prompt
like ‘‘Let’s think step-by-step’’158. Leap-of-thought162 encourages the model to use creative rather than logical reasoning.
Although single-path reasoning matches well with certain situations,163 its ability to adjust to different conditions is limited.
Conversely, multi-path reasoning examines several paths
before consolidating them into a final plan,164,165 allowing for a
more thorough planning process that accounts for different scenarios. For example, least-to-most prompting166 breaks down
tasks into subproblems solved sequentially. Self-consistent
CoT167 chooses the most consistent answer from a set of CoT
answers. Tree-of-thoughts164 extends reasoning paths into a
tree-like structure, generating multiple paths from each thought
node and using search algorithms to select the final path. Graphof-thoughts168 further develops reasoning paths into a graph
structure for complex reasoning. To identify the optimal path,
methods such as voting strategies,167 Monte Carlo tree
search,169 and breadth/depth-first search algorithms164 are
used. Through direct reasoning, agents can generate thought
that could consider the protein targets in a pathway and experiments to test the role of a candidate protein target (Figure 5C).
Reasoning with feedback
Experimental and human feedback can help AI agents to
improve reasoning and planning processes.11,68,149 This feedback may include agent-human interaction and responses
from agents, which can be complementary biological assays
quantifying downstream effects of target molecules.170 In each
reasoning cycle, React11 incorporates insights from previous actions to refine its thought process and inform future actions.
LLM-Planner171 dynamically adjusts plans based on new observations in an embodied environment. Inner Monologue126 uses
both passive and active scene descriptions and feedback from
recent actions to guide future actions. Voyager68 improves planning for subsequent steps by considering environment feedback, execution errors, and self-verification.
Beyond external feedback, an agent’s feedback mechanism
enables self-assessing the initial plan.170,172 Techniques like
self-refine170 revise action outputs based on the LLM evaluation,

the self-check170 mechanism allows the agent to review and
adjust its reasoning, and reflection12 mechanisms use prompt
agents to update their decision-making. These techniques incorporate feedback from biologists, such as exploring experimental
methods and environmental constraints like lab inventory
(Figure 5D). Reasoning capabilities are necessary for generating
hypotheses and conducting experiments. Generating novel hypotheses requires modeling general biomedical knowledge,
the specific information on the current state of a biological system, and consideration of potential next steps. LLM-based
agents can generate hypotheses through in-context reasoning,
but careful selection is necessary to ensure high-quality hypotheses.173
CHALLENGES
This perspective outlines key steps for implementing AI agents in
biomedical research and identifies areas that could benefit from
agentic AI. However, challenges remain and may be amplified
with the introduction of multi-agent systems (Figure 6).
Robustness and reliability
A barrier facing the deployment of agent systems—specifically
those categorized within levels 2 and 3 as discussed in Table 1—
is their propensity for generating unreliable predictions, including
the hallucination of non-factual information, reasoning errors, systematic biases, and failures in planning when connected with tools
and experimental platforms. These issues can be exacerbated by
overconfidence in such flawed predictions (agents lack awareness of their knowledge gaps) and high sensitivity to the precise
formulation of queries, particularly in the context of LLM-based
agents. This behavior has been traced to how these models are
trained. In particular, autoregressive loss compares the predicted
word sequence with the actual sequence in the training data. The
performance of a model trained with this loss is determined by
three factors: the probability distribution of the inputs, the
sequence of generated outputs, and the frequency of different
tasks encountered during training.174 As a result, model performance degrades on task variants that deviate from the assumptions made during training.175
Sensitivity to input and task probability also offers a potential
explanation for the widely observed success of various prompting techniques80,164,176 (methods to paraphrase the same
query). By providing informative context, instructive reasoning
steps, or representative examples, these techniques can act
as an empirical means by which task and input probability
(and, thus, model performance) are increased. However, crafting
high-quality prompts tends to be highly empirical while requiring
significant effort and domain knowledge.
Beyond the linguistic domain, even the most advanced
models fail in tasks with real-world entities that require physically
meaningful actions, posing an obstacle to embodied agents.
While embedding continuous sensor data into a language model
can lead to improvements,120 limitations to understanding physical interactions and long-horizon planning remain. The complexities of training such multimodal systems, the need for large
datasets to cover the range of embodied tasks and environments, and the computational demands of processing

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6141

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective
Figure 6. Challenges for AI agents in
biomedical discovery
Shown are critical challenges—including robustness and reliability, evaluation protocols, dataset
generation, governance, and risks—alongside
strategic approaches to address them.

instance, integrating human feedback
can promote desirable agent behavior,
but it can also exacerbate persuasive abilities, echoing false beliefs.182 Fine-tuning
existing models with new data can
compromise their original alignment, challenging the integrity of the AI agent’s intended purpose.183 Jailbreak attacks can
similarly affect post-deployment, highlighting the need for rigorous evaluation.184
Errors are inevitable in complex multiagent systems, making their management crucial to maintaining system
robustness and reliability. Due to their
interactive nature, these systems are sensitive to compounding errors, where small
issues can escalate into significant problems if not addressed promptly. Effective
error management strategies are essential for diagnosing, localizing, and mitigating such errors.

multimodal inputs all remain open questions.7 Deployment faces
challenges from false negatives causing repeated attempts and
eventual stalling of the embodied agent.126 Hence, it is necessary to verify the agent action plan before execution.
Uncertainty quantification can trigger fall-back safety measures like early termination, predefined safe maneuvers, or human-in-the-loop interventions. However, foundation models
cannot reason about the uncertainty associated with their outputs, and no well-established statistical protocol exists for
increasingly ubiquitous architectures.47,177 Techniques such as
various forms of prompting, e.g., Wang et al.,167 Tian et al.,178
and Kuhn et al.179 estimate uncertainty based on the model’s
predictive distribution, p(output|input), which may itself be subject to bias174; furthermore, it does not consider the distribution
of model parameters consistent with the observed training data
and marginalizes over its predictions.180 While conformal prediction181 has emerged as a framework for uncertainty estimation of
model predictions, its sensitivity to the choice of underlying statistical assumptions and the calibration of confidence levels have
been criticized. The lack of a default technique is partly due to the
difficulty of establishing a thorough quality assessment of uncertainty estimates. This makes it difficult to make choices in agent
design and to reassure users about its calibration.
One concern is that advanced capabilities come at the cost of
compromised transparency and the risk of misalignment. For

6142 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

Evaluation protocols
With more AI agents being developed,
frameworks for biologists and lay user
evaluations need to assess axes of agent performance beyond
accuracy. Evaluating AI agents requires an analysis of their theoretical capabilities and an assessment of practical implications,
including ethical considerations, regulatory compliance, and
the ability to integrate into discovery workflows. The challenge
lies in developing evaluations that consider these diverse factors. Agents that integrate ML tools, particularly those developed
by corporations, may undergo updates without prior notice to
users. This poses challenges for reproducibility, as updates
may alter the model’s behavior or performance without researchers being aware. The scientific community needs transparent change logs and version control for agents, akin to practice in software development.
Existing evaluation frameworks consider either holistic evaluations185,186 or benchmark the models for weak spots such as
task framing,187,188 long temporal dependencies, invalid formatting, or refusal to follow instructions.189 A caveat of such frameworks is the risk of evaluating how well the agents have learned
to use specific APIs versus general results grounded in real-world
interaction. Another challenge in evaluating agents is that biological systems are inherently dynamic, characterized by non-stationary distributions that evolve due to genetic mutations, environmental changes, and evolutionary pressures. Agents trained on
static datasets may struggle to accurately model or predict outcomes in these changing systems. The challenge lies in

ll
Perspective
developing agents capable of adapting to or continuously learning
from new data, ensuring their predictions remain accurate as the
underlying biological systems change. Techniques such as online
learning, transfer learning, and reinforcement learning can be used
to address this issue, but they come with their own set of challenges related to data availability and model complexity. Another
challenge is the lack of standardization in biomedical discovery
workflows, including data generation protocols that vary based
on factors like disease cell lines, dosage levels, and time points.190
This variability complicates the evaluation of agents for experimental planning. Evaluation of agents that use computational
tools and DBs will benefit from the increasing availability of standardized APIs.191,192
Dataset generation
As laid out, the vision for biomedical AI agents requires the capability of seeking, aggregating, perceiving, and reasoning over
data from various modalities, created using differing specifications and with inherent variation in quality and volume. To support this vision, there is a critical need for large, open datasets
that are both comprehensive and accessible, enabling the development of models across biological applications. Much human
effort in building systems for biomedical research is dedicated
to gathering and preparing such data for use in ML models
(e.g., specific to a particular modality, such as graphs, time series, or discrete sequences193). This requires vetting processes
and clear criteria for assessing the reliability and applicability
of datasets.
Noisy data, characterized by errors, inconsistencies, and outliers, poses a significant challenge for models attempting to
extract meaningful patterns and insights with minimal human
oversight or data preparation effort. In addition, multimodal
data require models to process different data representations
and formats and bridge semantic gaps between them. Tackling
these challenges necessitates advanced feature extraction,
fusion, and noise mitigation techniques while maintaining
robustness. As no pretraining phase (no matter how extensive)
will be able to provide adequate examples from all data sources,
models will also have to generalize to previously unseen sensory
inputs.
Governance of AI agents
The governance of AI agents presents challenges that intersect
technological, scientific, ethical, and regulatory domains. One
challenge is establishing comprehensive governance frameworks that balance innovation with accountability.194 As AI
agents gain autonomy, the necessity for robust guidelines to
ensure responsible development, deployment, and commercialization grows. The discourse increasingly advocates for agent
safeguarding to take precedence over further advancements in
autonomy. Yet, navigating the regulatory landscape and forging
an international consensus on AI governance remains complex
while the advancement of agent capabilities continues. Striking
a balance between innovation and safeguarding against potential risks requires collaboration among industry leaders, scientists, and policymakers.195
Safe adoption of AI agents requires addressing concerns of
safe deployment. Aligning ML tools, such as LLMs, with ethical

OPEN ACCESS

standards remains an open challenge, and ensuring the alignment of the agent as a digital entity raises complexity. Guidelines
concerning human-agent interactions are underdeveloped
despite the potential for unintended harmful consequences
and malicious intent. Safeguarding frameworks are developed
that include training, licensing, and mandatory safety and ethical
compliance checks for agents.86
As AI agents become more integral to workflows in biological
domains, monitoring their behavior grows increasingly complex. Currently, verifying the accuracy and trustworthiness of
agent outputs is not straightforward, with only a limited number
of systems capable of linking generated content to relevant references. It is essential to develop robust verification systems
that can provide traceable references for generated content.
Assessing the synthesized knowledge may be impractical and
unattainable as agents evolve further. When agents’ capabilities become comparable to those of human experts, the risk
of becoming overly reliant on AI increases, which could
lead to a decrease in human expertise. In the worst-case scenario, such reliance could introduce a broad spectrum of safety
hazards due to inadequate oversight. To address these challenges, human-in-the-loop approaches can help maintain
accountability. Continuous training and development of human
expertise alongside AI can mitigate the risks of over-reliance
on AI.
Risks and safeguards
Autonomous experiments that do not include careful planning,
broad consultation, competent execution, and ongoing adaptation might create long-term harms that outweigh the benefits.
Although anticipating all potential complications is impossible,
exploring possible problems early and frequently could reduce
the expected cost of such issues. The ethical and technical considerations relevant to AI agents are vast and deeply interconnected, particularly in biomedicine. This section will highlight
some key categories.
Neglect can lead to risks similar to those of malicious intent.
Multi-agent systems where some agents represent LLMs might,
through equipment malfunctions and insufficient maintenance,
inadvertently create harmful substances, for instance, by
contaminating a procedure that would otherwise be safe. This
issue is not unique to multi-agent systems; instead, it is a general
lab safety concern. However, the absence of close human supervision removes a critical auditing layer. The increased role
of automation in agent systems raises safety issues: a powerful,
unaligned system prone to misinterpreting user requests or unfamiliar with lab safety practices could, given access to a wellstocked scientific facility, do damage by, for instance, mixing
volatile substances or developing and dispersing toxins or pathogens. These are among the scenarios that most concern AI
safety researchers.
Agents leverage LLMs’ world knowledge and general
reasoning abilities obtained during pretraining for robotics and
planning. However, while efforts have been made to teach the
robots the ‘‘dos,’’ the ‘‘don’ts’’ received less attention. Teaching
robot agents the don’ts is crucial for conveying instructions
about prohibited actions, assessing the agent’s understanding
of these restrictions, and ensuring compliance.196 For LLM

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6143

ll
OPEN ACCESS

agents, plug-in safety chips196 feature safety constraint modules
that translate natural language constraints into formal safety
constraints for the robot to adhere to. Experiments with robots
highlight the potential for integrating formal methods with
LLMs for better robotic control.
LLMs trained in code completion can write Python programs
from docstrings197 by training the model on the code completion
task to write the code based on natural language commands.198
Given natural language commands, these code-writing LLMs
can be repurposed to write robot policy code. However, if the
translation inaccurately reflects the intended safety constraints,
it could lead to either overly restrictive behavior, preventing the
robot from performing its tasks effectively, or insufficiently stringent constraints, leading to safety violations. However, the robot
policy code is less reliable for enforcing safety constraints than
verifiable safe operations that satisfy standards such as International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 61508. The
approach assumes that all given instructions are feasible and
lacks a mechanism to predict the correctness of a response
before execution. However, due to their reliance on patterns in
the training data, LLMs might generate syntactically correct
but semantically inappropriate code. Additionally, generalizing
plans across robotic embodiments is brittle with current LLMs.
Addressing the ethical implications of AI agents is paramount,
given the direct impact on human and animal health and life. The
handling of sensitive biological and medical data necessitates
robust technological and regulatory measures to ensure security
and confidentiality. One promising approach involves using privacy-preserving computation to train agents to protect the privacy of highly sensitive medical data. Homomorphic encryption
can secure sensitive data by allowing computations on encrypted data, and federated learning techniques allow training agents
in a distributed manner without the need to centralize from
across sites into a single data repository.
Algorithmic fairness is equally crucial, as biased AI agents can
exacerbate health disparities across patients and increase inequalities in the volume of generated datasets and quality of
biomedical knowledge, especially for diseases in long-tailed distributions in biological systems. The development of techniques
such as adversarial debiasing and fair representation learning offers promising avenues to mitigate these risks. In addition, the
black-box nature of these compound AI systems poses another
challenge, particularly in healthcare, where interpretability is vital
for clinical adoption and patient trust. To provide clearer rationales for the agents’ decisions and make them more acceptable
to users, it will become crucial to incorporate interactive dialogue
systems that explain agentic outputs through natural language
conversations. Ethical considerations surrounding biosafety
emerge as AI agents advance toward level 3 agents. These
issues intersect with ongoing debates in bioethics regarding
synthetic biology and artificial organisms, requiring regulatory
guidance and engagement from bioethicists and safety
experts to ensure alignment with societal values and safety
standards.
Challenges uniquely relevant for biomedical AI agents
Biomedical AI agents face several unique challenges that distinguish them from other applications of AI. While strong AI agents

6144 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

Perspective
have the potential to mitigate some of these challenges, their implementation in biomedical research requires careful consideration. One of the primary challenges is the need for robust and
reliable systems capable of reasoning, planning, and executing
actions in both virtual and hybrid virtual-physical environments.
For instance, natural language reasoning chains can enhance
the interpretability of an agent’s actions and contextual outcomes, aiding researchers in understanding AI-generated insights. However, certain challenges persist that can delay the
reliable implementation of AI agents or even cause harm if these
systems are deployed prematurely. A critical issue is the difficulty in distinguishing between correlation and causality. Current
AI agents struggle with generating strong hypotheses,
reasoning, and conducting experimental validations, tasks that
typically require advanced AI systems (level 3 agents) or human
intervention. Moreover, AI agents need improved interfaces to
interact safely and effectively with experimental platforms. These
platforms themselves face limitations in producing unbiased, AIready datasets that accurately capture the intra- and inter-variation inherent in biological systems. Such limitations hinder the
generalization capabilities of AI agents, which rely on comprehensive and high-quality data to function optimally. The absence
of data from high-throughput techniques can lead to AI agents
forming false hypotheses or causing harm. This risk is exacerbated when AI agents work with small, biased biological datasets, which may be affected by issues like batch effects.
OUTLOOK
Biomedical research is undergoing a transformative era with advances in computational intelligence. Presently, AI’s role is constrained to assistive tools in low-stake and narrow tasks where
scientists can review the results. We outline agent-based AI to
pave the way for systems capable of reflective learning and
reasoning that consist of LLM-based systems and other ML
tools, experimental platforms, humans, or even combinations
of them. The continual nature of human-AI interaction and building trustworthy sandboxes,199 where AI agents can fail and learn
from their mistakes, is one way to achieve this. This involves
developing AI agents proficient in various tasks, such as planning discovery workflows with ML feedback loops for experiments and performing self-assessment to identify and seek out
gaps in their knowledge.
Ensuring context-appropriate and user-specific agent
behavior
To ensure agents behave as intended, it is essential to focus on
their robustness and reliability by implementing evaluation protocols that test agents in diverse scenarios to identify potential vulnerabilities. Moreover, grounding agents in ethical guidelines
and documentation, such as lab protocols and safety guidelines,
is vital to align their actions with human values and safety standards. By addressing these aspects, we can ensure that the
behavior of biomedical agents is both reliable and ethically
compliant.
Concretely, we believe that in the early stages of technological
adaptation, it is desirable to limit an agent’s capabilities to a subset of their full potential by restricting action spaces, thereby

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective
eliminating the chance of catastrophic risk (e.g., decisions resulting in loss of life). Similar precedents for technological adaptation
are already in place for other autonomous systems with similar
risk profiles, such as autonomous driving, where a staggered
technological adaptation is motivated by ethical considerations.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Governance and responsible human-AI partnership
Managing errors requires designing strategies to diagnose,
localize, and mitigate them. To diagnose errors internally, agents
should use their reasoning abilities to build self-evaluation
schemes, allowing them to assess their current status and actions. Externally, training independent anomaly detection and distribution shift models with domain knowledge of specific biomedical use cases can provide additional supervision to diagnose
errors. Iterative agent interactions can result in cascading errors.
To mitigate this, the evaluation agent can apply reverse reasoning
chains to trace back to the initial error. Enhancing the adaptive
reasoning abilities of agents is crucial for dynamically adjusting
to changing conditions and rectifying errors as they occur.
To address the challenge of governance, we believe that
broad consensus is best achieved through multidisciplinary,
cross-partisan, non-profit, and public institutions committed to
the public good. We welcome the recent establishment of
several public AI safety institutions to facilitate these discussions. Focus groups with expertise in AI agents can develop
ethical and technical evaluation standards that can form the basis for regulation, including the required degree of human oversight and accountability frameworks. Additionally, we advocate
for the development of policies through international initiatives
to minimize the risk of regulatory gaps, where risks might otherwise be outsourced to jurisdictions lacking enforceable regulations.
By fostering responsible human-AI partnerships and establishing robust governance frameworks, we can unlock the
transformative potential of AI agents in biomedical research.
Collaborative agentic approaches can lead to groundbreaking
advances, ultimately improving human health and well-being.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the support of NIH R01-HD108794, NSF CAREER
2339524, US DoD FA8702-15-D-0001, and ARPA-H BDF Toolbox Program,
and awards from Harvard Data Science Initiative, Amazon Faculty Research,
Google Research Scholar Program, AstraZeneca Research, Roche Alliance
with Distinguished Scientists, Sanofi iDEA-iTECH Award, Pfizer Research,
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, John and Virginia Kaneb Fellowship award at Harvard Medical School, Biswas Computational Biology Initiative in partnership
with the Milken Institute, Harvard Medical School Dean’s Innovation Awards
for the Use of AI in Research, and Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural
and Artificial Intelligence at Harvard University. A.F. is supported by the Kempner Institute Graduate Fellowship. A.N. is supported by the Herchel SmithHarvard Undergraduate Science Fellowship, the Yun Family Research Fellows
Fund for Revolutionary Thinking, and the Summer Institute in Biomedical Informatics at Harvard Medical School. V.G. is supported by the Medical Research
Council, MR/W00710X/1. Y.E. is supported by grant T32 HG002295 from the
National Human Genome Research Institute and the NSDEG fellowship. The
authors would like to thank Owen Queen, Alejandro Velez-Arce, and Ruth
Johnson for their constructive comments on the draft manuscript. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the funders.

All authors contributed to the design and writing of the manuscript, helped
shape the research, provided critical feedback, and commented on the manuscript and its revisions. M.Z. conceived the study and was in charge of overall
direction and planning.

The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Boiko, D.A., MacKnight, R., Kline, B., and Gomes, G. (2023). Autonomous chemical research with large language models. Nature 624, 570–
578. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06792-0.
2. Bran, A.M., Cox, S., Schilter, O., Baldassari, C., White, A.D., and Schwaller, P. (2024). Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools.
Nat. Mach. Intell. 6, 525–535. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-02400832-8. https://openreview.net/forum?id=wdGIL6lx3l.
3. Xi, Z., Chen, W., Guo, X., He, W., Ding, Y., Hong, B., Zhang, M., Wang, J.,
Jin, S., Zhou, E., et al. (2023). The rise and potential of large language
model based agents: A survey. Preprint at arXiv.
4. Guo, T., Chen, X., Wang, Y., Chang, R., Pei, S., Chawla, N.V., Wiest, O.,
and Zhang, X. (2024). Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. Preprint at arXiv.
5. Wang, H., Fu, T., Du, Y., Gao, W., Huang, K., Liu, Z., Chandak, P., Liu, S.,
Van Katwyk, P., Deac, A., et al. (2023). Scientific discovery in the age of
artificial intelligence. Nature 620, 47–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-023-06221-2.
6. Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.A., Lacroix,
T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., et al. (2023). Llama:
Open and efficient foundation language models. Preprint at arXiv.
7. Gemini Team, Anil, R., Borgeaud, S., Wu, Y., Alayrac, J.B., Jiahui, Y., Soricut, R., Schalkwyk, J., Dai, A.M., Hauth, A., et al. (2023). Gemini: a family
of highly capable multimodal models. Preprint at arXiv.
8. Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., and Sutskever, I. (2018).
Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. https://
cdn.openai.com/research-covers/language-unsupervised/language_
understanding_paper.pdf.
9. Vemprala, S., Bonatti, R., Bucker, A., and Kapoor, A. (2023). Chatgpt for
robotics: design principles and model abilities. Microsoft Auton. Syst.
Robot. Res 2, 20.
10. Significant Gravitas (2023). Autogpt. https://agpt.co.
11. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Dian, Y., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K.R., and Cao,
Y. (2023). React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X.
12. Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K.R., and Yao, S.
(2023). Reflexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning.
In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
13. Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., Wu, Y., Zhang, S., Zhu, E., Li, B., Jiang, L.,
Zhang, X., and Wang, C. (2023). Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation framework. Preprint at arXiv.
14. Singh, I., Blukis, V., Mousavian, A., Goyal, A., Xu, D., Tremblay, J., Fox,
D., Thomason, J., and Garg, A. (2023). Progprompt: Generating situated
robot task plans using large language models. In 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA48891.2023.10161317.
15. Huang, W., Abbeel, P., Pathak, D., and Mordatch, I. (2022). Language
models as zero-shot planners: extracting actionable knowledge for
embodied agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(PMLR), pp. 9118–9147.

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6145

ll
OPEN ACCESS

16. Krenn, M., Pollice, R., Guo, S.Y., Aldeghi, M., Cervera-Lierta, A., Friederich, P., dos Passos Gomes, G., Häse, F., Jinich, A., Nigam, A.K., et al.
(2022). On scientific understanding with artificial intelligence. Nat. Rev.
Phys. 4, 761–769. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-022-00518-3.
17. Sun, L., Huang, Y., Wang, H., Wu, S., Zhang, Q., Gao, C., Huang, Y., Lyu,
W., Zhang, Y., Li, X., et al. (2024). Trustllm: Trustworthiness in large language models. Preprint at arXiv.
18. Kotha, S., Springer, J.M., and Raghunathan, A. (2023). Understanding
catastrophic forgetting in language models via implicit inference. Preprint
at arXiv.
19. Li, H., Moon, J.T., Purkayastha, S., Celi, L.A., Trivedi, H., and Gichoya,
J.W. (2023). Ethics of large language models in medicine and medical
research. Lancet Digit. Health 5, e333–e335. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2589-7500(23)00083-3.
20. Goetz, L., Trengove, M., Trotsyuk, A., and Federico, C.A. (2023). Unreliable llm bioethics assistants: Ethical and pedagogical risks. Am. J. Bioeth. 23, 89–91. https://doi.org/10.1080/15265161.2023.2249843.
21. Kumar, A., Singh, S., Murty, S.V., and Ragupathy, S. (2024). The ethics of
interaction: Mitigating security threats in llms. Preprint at arXiv.
22. Sachs, K., Perez, O., Pe’er, D., Lauffenburger, D.A., and Nolan, G.P.
(2005). Causal protein-signaling networks derived from multiparameter
single-cell data. Science 308, 523–529. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1105809.
23. Rao, R.M., Liu, J., Verkuil, R., Meier, J., Canny, J., Abbeel, P., Sercu, T.,
and Rives, A. (2021). Msa transformer. In International Conference on
Machine Learning (PMLR), pp. 8844–8856.
24. Lin, Z., Akin, H., Rao, R., Hie, B., Zhu, Z., Lu, W., Smetanin, N., Verkuil, R.,
Kabeli, O., Shmueli, Y., et al. (2023). Evolutionary-scale prediction of
atomic-level protein structure with a language model. Science 379,
1123–1130. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.ade2574.
25. Baek, M., DiMaio, F., Anishchenko, I., Dauparas, J., Ovchinnikov, S., Lee,
G.R., Wang, J., Cong, Q., Kinch, L.N., Schaeffer, R.D., et al. (2021). Accurate prediction of protein structures and interactions using a threetrack neural network. Science 373, 871–876. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abj8754.
26. Alipanahi, B., Delong, A., Weirauch, M.T., and Frey, B.J. (2015). Predicting the sequence specificities of dna- and rna-binding proteins by deep
learning. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 831–838. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nbt.3300.
27. Theodoris, C.V., Xiao, L., Chopra, A., Chaffin, M.D., Al Sayed, Z.R., Hill,
M.C., Mantineo, H., Brydon, E.M., Zeng, Z., Liu, X.S., et al. (2023). Transfer learning enables predictions in network biology. Nature 618, 616–624.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06139-9.
28. Yu, M.K., Kramer, M., Dutkowski, J., Srivas, R., Licon, K., Kreisberg, J.F.,
Ng, C.T., Krogan, N., Sharan, R., and Ideker, T. (2016). Translation of Genotype to Phenotype by a Hierarchy of Cell Subsystems. Cell Syst. 2, 77–
88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2016.02.003.
29. Singh, D., Febbo, P.G., Ross, K., Jackson, D.G., Manola, J., Ladd, C.,
Tamayo, P., Renshaw, A.A., D’Amico, A.V., Richie, J.P., et al. (2002).
Gene expression correlates of clinical prostate cancer behavior. Cancer
Cell 1, 203–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1535-6108(02)00030-2.
30. Shipp, M.A., Ross, K.N., Tamayo, P., Weng, A.P., Kutok, J.L., Aguiar,
R.C.T., Gaasenbeek, M., Angelo, M., Reich, M., Pinkus, G.S., et al.
(2002). Diffuse large b-cell lymphoma outcome prediction by geneexpression profiling and supervised machine learning. Nat. Med. 8,
68–74.
31. Kuenzi, B.M., Park, J., Fong, S.H., Sanchez, K.S., Lee, J., Kreisberg, J.F.,
Ma, J., and Ideker, T. (2020). Predicting drug response and synergy using
a deep learning model of human cancer cells. Cancer Cell 38, 672–
684.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2020.09.014.
32. Ren, F., Aliper, A., Chen, J., Zhao, H., Rao, S., Kuppe, C., Ozerov, I.V.,
Zhang, M., Witte, K., Kruse, C., et al. (2024). A small-molecule tnik inhibitor targets fibrosis in preclinical and clinical models. Published online

6146 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

Perspective
March 8, 2024. Nat. Biotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-02402143-0.
33. Stokes, J.M., Yang, K., Swanson, K., Jin, W., Cubillos-Ruiz, A., Donghia,
N.M., MacNair, C.R., French, S., Carfrae, L.A., Bloom-Ackermann, Z.,
et al. (2020). A deep learning approach to antibiotic discovery. Cell
180, 688–702.e13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.01.021.
34. Berman, H.M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T.N., Weissig,
H., Shindyalov, I.N., and Bourne, P.E. (2000). The protein data bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 235–242. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/28.1.235.
35. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, Abecasis, G.R., Auton, A., Brooks,
L.D., DePristo, M.A., Durbin, R.M., Handsaker, R.E., Kang, H.M., Marth,
G.T., and McVean, G.A. (2012). An integrated map of genetic variation
from 1,092 human genomes. Nature 491, 56–65. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nature11632.
36. Wishart, D.S., Knox, C., Guo, A.C., Shrivastava, S., Hassanali, M., Stothard, P., Chang, Z., and Woolsey, J. (2006). Drugbank: a comprehensive
resource for in silico drug discovery and exploration. Nucleic Acids Res.
34, D668–D672. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkj067.
37. Varadi, M., Anyango, S., Deshpande, M., Nair, S., Natassia, C., Yordanova, G., Yuan, D., Stroe, O., Wood, G., Laydon, A., et al. (2022). Alphafold protein structure database: massively expanding the structural
coverage of protein-sequence space with high-accuracy models. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, D439–D444. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1061.
38. Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, M., Ronneberger,

O., Tunyasuvunakool, K., Bates, R., Zı́dek,
A., Potapenko, A., et al.
(2021). Highly accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature 596, 583–589. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2.
39. Brin, S., and Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual
web search engine. Comput. Netw. ISDN Syst. 30, 107–117. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0169-7552(98)00110-X.
40. Altschul, S.F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E.W., and Lipman, D.J. (1990).
Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403–410. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80360-2.
41. Gaulton, A., Hersey, A., Nowotka, M., Bento, A.P., Chambers, J., Mendez, D., Mutowo, P., Atkinson, F., Bellis, L.J., Cibrián-Uhalte, E., et al.
(2017). The chembl database in 2017. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D945–
D954. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw1074.
42. Van Kempen, M., Kim, S.S., Tumescheit, C., Mirdita, M., Lee, J., Gilchrist,
C.L.M., Söding, J., and Steinegger, M. (2024). Fast and accurate protein
structure search with foldseek. Nat. Biotechnol. 42, 243–246.
43. Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Cui, L., Cai, D., Liu, L., Fu, T., Huang, X., Zhao, E.,
Zhang, Y., Chen, Y., et al. Siren’s song in the ai ocean: a survey on hallucination in large language models. Preprint at arXiv.
44. Lála, J., O’Donoghue, O., Shtedritski, A., Cox, S., Rodriques, S.G., and
White, A.D. (2023). Paperqa: Retrieval-augmented generative agent for
scientific research. Preprint at arXiv.
45. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G.E. (2012). Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25.
46. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for
image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 770–778. https://doi.org/10.1109/
CVPR.2016.90.
47. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez,
A.N., Kaiser, q., and Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30.
48. Hernández-Garcı́a, A., Saxena, N., Jain, M., Liu, C.H., and Bengio, Y.
(2024). Multi-fidelity active learning with GFlownets. ICLR. https://
openreview.net/forum?id=3QR230r11w.
49. Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P.,
Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Gray, A., et al. (2022). Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, A.H. Oh, A. Agarwal, D.

ll
Perspective
Belgrave, and K. Cho, eds. (ICLR). https://openreview.net/forum?
id=TG8KACxEON.
50. Zhavoronkov, A., Ivanenkov, Y.A., Aliper, A., Veselov, M.S., Aladinskiy,
V.A., Aladinskaya, A.V., Terentiev, V.A., Polykovskiy, D.A., Kuznetsov,
M.D., Asadulaev, A., et al. (2019). Deep learning enables rapid identification of potent ddr1 kinase inhibitors. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 1038–1040.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-0224-x.
51. Hie, B.L., and Yang, K.K. (2022). Adaptive machine learning for protein
engineering. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 72, 145–152. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.sbi.2021.11.002. https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S09
59440X21001457.
52. Lutz, I.D., Wang, S., Norn, C., Courbet, A., Borst, A.J., Zhao, Y.T., Dosey,
A., Cao, L., Xu, J., Leaf, E.M., et al. (2023). Top-down design of protein
architectures with reinforcement learning. Science 380, 266–273.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adf6591.
53. Bailey, M., Moayedpour, S., Li, R., Corrochano-Navarro, A., Kötter, A.,
Kogler-Anele, L., Riahi, S., Grebner, C., Hessler, G., Matter, H., et al.
(2023). Deep batch active learning for drug discovery. Preprint at bioRxiv.
54. Soleimany, A.P., Amini, A., Goldman, S., Rus, D., Bhatia, S.N., and Coley,
C.W. (2021). Evidential deep learning for guided molecular property prediction and discovery. ACS Cent. Sci. 7, 1356–1367. https://doi.org/10.
1021/acscentsci.1c00546.
55. Zhang, J., Cammarata, L., Squires, C., Sapsis, T.P., and Uhler, C. (2023).
Active learning for optimal intervention design in causal models. Nat.
Mach. Intell. 5, 1066–1075. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-02300719-0.
56. Yala, A., Mikhael, P.G., Lehman, C., Lin, G., Strand, F., Wan, Y.L.,
Hughes, K., Satuluru, S., Kim, T., Banerjee, I., et al. (2022). Optimizing
risk-based breast cancer screening policies with reinforcement learning.
Nat. Med. 28, 136–143. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01599-w.
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-021-01599-w.
57. Sumers, T., Yao, S., Narasimhan, K., and Griffiths, T. (2024). Cognitive architectures for language agents. Transact Mach Learn Res. https://
openreview.net/forum?id=1i6ZCvflQJ.

OPEN ACCESS

65. Singhal, K., Azizi, S., Tu, T., Mahdavi, S.S., Wei, J., Chung, H.W., Scales,
N., Tanwani, A., Cole-Lewis, H., Pfohl, S., et al. (2023). Large language
models encode clinical knowledge. Nature 620, 172–180. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41586-023-06291-2.
66. Singhal, K., Tu, T., Gottweis, J., Sayres, R., Wulczyn, E., Le Hou, K.C.,
Pfohl, S., Cole-Lewis, H., Neal, D., et al. (2023). Towards expert-level
medical question answering with large language models. Preprint
at arXiv.
67. Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J.D., Dhariwal, P.,
Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al. (2020). Language
models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan,
and H. Lin, eds. (Curran Associates, Inc.), pp. 1877–1901.
68. Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., and
Anandkumar, A. (2023). Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with
large language models. In Intrinsically-Motivated and Open-Ended
Learning Workshop @NeurIPS2023. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=nfx5IutEed.
69. Fernando, C., Banarse, D.S., Michalewski, H., Osindero, S., and Rocktäschel, T. (2024). Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via
prompt evolution. ICLR. https://openreview.net/forum?id=HKkiX32Zw1.
70. Yang, C., Wang, X., Lu, Y., Liu, H., Le, Q.V., Zhou, D., and Chen, X. (2023).
Large language models as optimizers. Preprint at arXiv.
71. LeCun, Y. (2022). A path towards autonomous machine intelligence.
Open Rev. 1, 1–62.
72. Liang, W., Zhang, Y., Cao, H., Wang, B., Ding, D.Y., Yang, X., Vodrahalli, K.,
He, S., Smith, D.S., Yin, Y., et al. (2024). Can large language models provide useful feedback on research papers? a large-scale empirical analysis.
NEJM AI 1, AIoa2400196. https://doi.org/10.1056/AIoa2400196.
73. Justin Chih-yao, C., Saha, S., and Bansal, M. (2024). Reconcile: Roundtable conference improves reasoning via consensus among diverse
LLMs.. Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. 1, 7066–7085.

58. Wang, L., Ma, C., Feng, X., Zhang, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, J., Chen, Z.,
Tang, J., Chen, X., Lin, Y., et al. (2024). A survey on large language model
based autonomous agents. Front. Comput. Sci. 18, 1–26. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11704-024-40231-1.

74. Sanders, L.M., Scott, R.T., Yang, J.H., Qutub, A.A., Garcia Martin, H.,
Berrios, D.C., Hastings, J.J.A., Rask, J., Mackintosh, G., Hoarfrost,
A.L., et al. (2023). Biological research and self-driving labs in deep space
supported by artificial intelligence. Nat. Mach. Intell. 5, 208–219. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s42256-023-00618-4.

59. Wei, J., Bosma, M., Zhao, V., Guu, K., Adams Wei, Y., Lester, B., Du, N.,
Dai, A.M., and Le, Q.V. (2022). Finetuned language models are zero-shot
learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR.

kovic
, P., Buesing, L., Blackwell, S., Zheng, D., Tomasev,
75. Davies, A., Velic
N., Tanburn, R., Battaglia, P., Blundell, C., Juhász, A., et al. (2021).
Advancing mathematics by guiding human intuition with ai. Nature 600,
70–74. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04086-x.

60. Huang, Z., Bianchi, F., Yuksekgonul, M., Montine, T.J., and Zou, J.
(2023). A visual–language foundation model for pathology image analysis
using medical twitter. Nat. Med. 29, 2307–2316. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41591-023-02504-3.

76. Tshitoyan, V., Dagdelen, J., Weston, L., Dunn, A., Rong, Z., Kononova,
O., Persson, K.A., Ceder, G., and Jain, A. (2019). Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge from materials science literature. Nature 571, 95–98. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1335-8.

61. Nori, H., Lee, Y.T., Zhang, S., Carignan, D., Edgar, R., Fusi, N., King, N.,
Larson, J., Li, Y., Liu, W., et al. (2023). Can generalist foundation models
outcompete special-purpose tuning? case study in medicine. Preprint
at arXiv.
62. Park, J.S., O’Brien, J., Cai, C.J., Morris, M.R., Liang, P., and Bernstein,
M.S. (2023). Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior.
In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, pp. 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1145/3586183.
3606763.
63. Luo, R., Sun, L., Xia, Y., Qin, T., Zhang, S., Poon, H., and Liu, T.Y. (2022).
Biogpt: generative pre-trained transformer for biomedical text generation
and mining. Brief. Bioinform. 23, bbac409. https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/
bbac409.
64. Jiang, L.Y., Liu, X.C., Nejatian, N.P., Nasir-Moin, M., Wang, D., Abidin, A.,
Eaton, K., Riina, H.A., Laufer, I., Punjabi, P., et al. (2023). Health systemscale language models are all-purpose prediction engines. Nature 619,
357–362.

77. Jablonka, K.M., Schwaller, P., Ortega-Guerrero, A., and Smit, B. (2024).
Leveraging large language models for predictive chemistry. Nat. Mach.
Intell. 6, 161–169. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-023-00788-1.
78. Glass, D.J., and Hall, N. (2008). A brief history of the hypothesis. Cell 134,
378–381. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.033.
79. Lim, Y., Tamayo-Orrego, L., Schmid, E., Tarnauskaite, Z., Kochenova,
O.V., Gruar, R., Muramatsu, S., Lynch, L., Schlie, A.V., Carroll, P.L.,
et al. (2023). In silico protein interaction screening uncovers donson’s
role in replication initiation. Science 381, eadi3448. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.adi3448.
80. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Le Chi, Q.V.,
Zhou, D., et al. (2022). Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in
large language models. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 24824–24837.
81. Zhou, J., Zhang, B., Chen, X., Li, H., Xu, X., Chen, S., and Gao, X. (2023).
Automated bioinformatics analysis via autoba. Preprint at arXiv.
82. Tang, X., Zou, A., Zhang, Z., Li, Z., Zhao, Y., Zhang, X., Cohan, A., and
Gerstein, M. (2023). Medagents: Large language models as collaborators

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6147

ll
OPEN ACCESS

Perspective

for zero-shot medical reasoning. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.
18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.33.

cell.2017.10.049. https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0092867
417313090.

83. Hu, X., Liu, G., Zhao, Y., and Zhang, H. (2023). De novo drug design using
reinforcement learning with multiple gpt agents. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.

100. Mitchell, D.C., Kuljanin, M., Li, J., Van Vranken, J.G., Bulloch, N.,
Schweppe, D.K., Huttlin, E.L., and Gygi, S.P. (2023). A proteome-wide
atlas of drug mechanism of action. Nat. Biotechnol. 41, 845–857.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01539-0.

84. Morris, M.R., Sohl-Dickstein, J., Fiedel, N., Warkentin, T., Dafoe, A.,
Faust, A., Farabet, C., and Legg, S. (2023). Levels of agi: Operationalizing
progress on the path to agi. Preprint at arXiv.
85. Urbina, F., Lentzos, F., Invernizzi, C., and Ekins, S. (2022). Dual use of
artificial-intelligence-powered drug discovery. Nat. Mach. Intell. 4, 189–
191. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00465-9. https://www.nature.
com/articles/s42256-022-00465-9.
86. Tang, X., Jin, Q., Zhu, K., Yuan, T., Zhang, Y., Zhou, W., Qu, M., Zhao, Y.,
Tang, J., Zhang, Z., et al. (2024). Prioritizing safeguarding over autonomy:
Risks of llm agents for science. Preprint at arXiv.
87. Baker, D., and Church, G. (2024). Protein design meets biosecurity. Science 383, 349. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.ado1671.
88. Marees, A.T., de Kluiver, H., Stringer, S., Vorspan, F., Curis, E., MarieClaire, C., and Derks, E.M. (2018). A tutorial on conducting genomewide association studies: Quality control and statistical analysis. Int. J.
Methods Psychiatr. Res. 27, e1608. https://doi.org/10.1002/mpr.1608.
89. Uffelmann, E., Huang, Q.Q., Munung, N.S., de Vries, J., Okada, Y., Martin, A.R., Martin, H.C., Lappalainen, T., and Posthuma, D. (2021).
Genome-wide association studies. Nat. Rev. Methods Primers 1, 59.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-021-00056-9.
90. Frueh, F.W. (2010). Real-world clinical effectiveness, regulatory transparency and payer coverage: three ingredients for translating pharmacogenomics into clinical practice. Pharmacogenomics 11, 657–660. https://
doi.org/10.2217/pgs.10.46.
91. Panayiotopoulos, C.P. (2005). The Epilepsies: Seizures, Syndromes and
Management (Bladon Medical Publishing).
92. International League Against Epilepsy Consortium on Complex Epilepsies
(2023). Gwas meta-analysis of over 29,000 people with epilepsy identifies
26 risk loci and subtype-specific genetic architecture. Nat. Commun. 55,
1471–1482. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02088-w.
93. Sudlow, C., Gallacher, J., Allen, N., Beral, V., Burton, P., Danesh, J.,
Downey, P., Elliott, P., Green, J., Landray, M., et al. (2015). Uk biobank:
An open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide range of
complex diseases of middle and old age. PLoS Med. 12, e1001779.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001779.
94. Gamirova, R., Shagimardanova, E., Sato, T., Kannon, T., Gamirova, R.,
and Tajima, A. (2024). Identification of potential disease-associated variants in idiopathic generalized epilepsy using targeted sequencing.
J. Hum. Genet. 69, 59–67. https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-023-01208-3.
95. Oliver, K.L., Scheffer, I.E., Bennett, M.F., Grinton, B.E., Bahlo, M., and
Berkovic, S.F. (2023). Genes4Epilepsy: An epilepsy gene resource. Epilepsia 64, 1368–1375.
96. Salowe, R.J., Lee, R., Zenebe-Gete, S., Vaughn, M., Gudiseva, H.V., Pistilli, M., Kikut, A., Becker, E., Collins, D.W., He, J., et al. (2022). Recruitment strategies and lessons learned from a large genetic study of African
Americans. PLoS Glob. Public Health 2, e0000416. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pgph.0000416.
97. Aissani, B. (2014). Confounding by linkage disequilibrium. J. Hum. Genet.
59, 110–115. https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2013.130.
98. Regev, A., Teichmann, S.A., Lander, E.S., Amit, I., Benoist, C., Birney, E.,
Bodenmiller, B., Campbell, P., Carninci, P., Clatworthy, M., et al. (2017).
The human cell atlas. eLife 6, e27041. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.
27041. https://elifesciences.org/articles/27041.
99. Subramanian, A., Narayan, R., Corsello, S.M., Peck, D.D., Natoli, T.E.,
Lu, X., Gould, J., Davis, J.F., Tubelli, A.A., Asiedu, J.K., et al. (2017). A
next generation connectivity map: L1000 platform and the first
1,000,000 profiles. Cell 171, 1437–1452.e17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

6148 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

101. Ghandi, M., Huang, F.W., Jané-Valbuena, J., Kryukov, G.V., Lo, C.C.,
McDonald, E.R., Barretina, J., Gelfand, E.T., Bielski, C.M., Li, H., et al.
(2019). Next-generation characterization of the cancer cell line encyclopedia. Nature 569, 503–508. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-0191186-3.
102. Chandrasekaran, S.N., Cimini, B.A., Goodale, A., Miller, L., Kost-Alimova, M., Jamali, N., Doench, J.G., Fritchman, B., Skepner, A., Melanson, M., et al. (2022). Three million images and morphological profiles
of cells treated with matched chemical and genetic perturbations. Nat.
Methods 21, 1114–1121.
103. De Teresa-Trueba, I., Goetz, S.K., Mattausch, A., Stojanovska, F., Zimmerli, C.E., Toro-Nahuelpan, M., Cheng, D.W.C., Tollervey, F., Pape,
C., Beck, M., et al. (2023). Convolutional networks for supervised mining
of molecular patterns within cellular context. Nat. Methods 20, 284–294.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01746-2. https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41592-022-01746-2.
104. Schiøtz, O.H., Kaiser, C.J.O., Klumpe, S., Morado, D.R., Poege, M.,
Schneider, J., Beck, F., Klebl, D.P., Thompson, C., and Plitzko, J.M.
(2023). Serial lift-out: sampling the molecular anatomy of whole organisms. Nat. Methods 21, 1684–1692.
105. Lundberg, E., and Borner, G.H.H. (2019). Spatial proteomics: a powerful
discovery tool for cell biology. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 285–302.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-018-0094-y.
106. Cho, N.H., Cheveralls, K.C., Brunner, A.D., Kim, K., Michaelis, A.C., Raghavan, P., Kobayashi, H., Savy, L., Li, J.Y., Canaj, H., et al. (2022). Opencell: Endogenous tagging for the cartography of human cellular organization. Science 375, eabi6983. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abi6983.
107. Johnson, G.T., Agmon, E., Akamatsu, M., Lundberg, E., Lyons, B.,
Ouyang, W., Quintero-Carmona, O.A., Riel-Mehan, M., Rafelski, S.,
and Horwitz, R. (2023). Building the next generation of virtual cells to understand cellular biology. Biophys. J. 122, 3560–3569. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.bpj.2023.04.006. https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S00
06349523002369.
108. Li, M.M., Huang, Y., Sumathipala, M., Liang, M.Q., Valdeolivas, A., Ananthakrishnan, A.N., Liao, K., Marbach, D., and Zitnik, M. (2024). Contextual
AI models for single-cell protein biology. Nat. Methods 21, 1546–1557.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-024-02341-3.
109. Russell, A.J.C., Weir, J.A., Nadaf, N.M., Shabet, M., Kumar, V., Kambhampati, S., Raichur, R., Marrero, G.J., Liu, S., Balderrama, K.S., et al.
(2024). Slide-tags enables single-nucleus barcoding for multimodal
spatial genomics. Nature 625, 101–109. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-023-06837-4. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-02306837-4.
110. Wik, L., Nordberg, N., Broberg, J., Björkesten, J., Assarsson, E., Henriksson, S., Grundberg, I., Pettersson, E., Westerberg, C., Liljeroth, E., et al.
(2021). Proximity extension assay in combination with next-generation
sequencing for high-throughput proteome-wide analysis. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 20, 100168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.100168.
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1535947621001407.
111. Liu, Y., DiStasio, M., Su, G., Asashima, H., Enninful, A., Qin, X., Deng, Y.,
Nam, J., Gao, F., Bordignon, P., et al. (2023). High-plex protein and whole
transcriptome co-mapping at cellular resolution with spatial cite-seq.
Nat. Biotechnol. 41, 1405–1409. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-02301676-0. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-023-01676-0.
112. Yoshikawa, N., Darvish, K., Vakili, M.G., Garg, A., and Aspuru-Guzik, A.
(2023). Digital pipette: open hardware for liquid transfer in self-driving
laboratories. Digit. Discov. 2, 1745–1751. https://doi.org/10.1039/

ll
Perspective
D3DD00115F. https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2023/dd/
d3dd00115f.
113. Dixit, A., Parnas, O., Li, B., Chen, J., Fulco, C.P., Jerby-Arnon, L., Marjanovic, N.D., Dionne, D., Burks, T., Raychowdhury, R., et al. (2016). Perturb-seq: dissecting molecular circuits with scalable single-cell rna
profiling of pooled genetic screens. Cell 167, 1853–1866.e17. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.038. https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0092867416316105.
114. Binan, L., Danquah, S., Valakh, V., Simonton, B., Bezney, J., Nehme, R.,
Cleary, B., and Farhi, S.L. (2023). Simultaneous crispr screening and
spatial transcriptomics reveals intracellular, intercellular, and functional
transcriptional circuits. Preprint at biorxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/
2023.11.30.569494.
115. Dang, C.V., Reddy, E.P., Shokat, K.M., and Soucek, L. (2017). Drugging
the ‘undruggable’cancer targets. Nat. Rev. Cancer 17, 502–508. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nrc.2017.36.
116. Lieber, T., Jeedigunta, S.P., Palozzi, J.M., Lehmann, R., and Hurd, T.R.
(2019). Mitochondrial fragmentation drives selective removal of deleterious mtdna in the germline. Nature 570, 380–384. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41586-019-1213-4.
117. Li, G., Al Kader Hammoud, H.A., Itani, H., Khizbullin, D., and Ghanem, B.
(2023). Camel: Communicative agents for ‘‘mind’’ exploration of large
language model society. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
118. Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., and Lee, Y.J. (2023). Visual instruction tuning. In
Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=w0H2xGHlkw.
119. Chen, J., Poskanzer, K.E., Freeman, M.R., and Monk, K.R. (2020). Liveimaging of astrocyte morphogenesis and function in zebrafish neural circuits. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 1297–1306. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593020-0703-x. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41593-020-0703-x.
120. Driess, D., Xia, F., Sajjadi, M.S.M., Lynch, C., Chowdhery, A., Ichter, B.,
Wahid, A., Tompson, J., Vuong, Q., Tianhe, Y., et al. (2023). PaLM-e: An
embodied multimodal language model. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho, B. Engelhardt, S. Sabato, and J. Scarlett, eds. (PMLR), pp. 8469–8488. https://
proceedings.mlr.press/v202/driess23a.html.
121. Li, J., Cai, Z., Vaites, L.P., Shen, N., Mitchell, D.C., Huttlin, E.L., Paulo,
J.A., Harry, B.L., and Gygi, S.P. (2021). Proteome-wide mapping of
short-lived proteins in human cells. Mol. Cell 81, 4722–4735.e5. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2021.09.015.
122. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S.,
Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al. (2021). Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International
conference on machine learning (PMLR), pp. 8748–8763.
123. Zhu, D., Chen, J., Shen, X., Li, X., and Elhoseiny, M. (2024). MiniGPT-4:
enhancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language
models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=1tZbq88f27.
124. Bavishi, R., Elsen, E., Hawthorne, C., Nye, M., Odena, A., Somani, A., and
Tasxırlar, S. (2023). Introducing our multimodal models. https://www.
adept.ai/blog/fuyu-8b.
125. Kopp, S., and Krämer, N. (2021). Revisiting human-agent communication: the importance of joint co-construction and understanding mental
states. Front. Psychol. 12, 580955. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.
580955.
126. Huang, W., Xia, F., Xiao, T., Chan, H., Liang, J., Florence, P., Zeng, A.,
Tompson, J., Mordatch, I., Chebotar, Y., et al. (2022). Inner monologue:
Embodied reasoning through planning with language models. In 6th
Annual Conference on Robot Learning. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=3R3Pz5i0tye.

OPEN ACCESS

127. Rafailov, R., Sharma, A., Mitchell, E., Ermon, S., Manning, C.D., and Finn,
C. (2023). Direct preference optimization: Your language model is
secretly a reward model. Preprint at arXiv.
128. Nascimento, N., Alencar, P., and Cowan, D. (2023). Self-adaptive large
language model (llm)-based multiagent systems. In IEEE International
Conference on Autonomic Computing and Self-Organizing Systems
Companion (ACSOS-C) (IEEE Publications), pp. 104–109. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ACSOS-C58168.2023.00048.
129. Lowe, R., Wu, Y.I., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Open, A.I., Abbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. (2017). Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30.
130. Hong, S., Zhuge, M., Chen, J., Zheng, X., Cheng, Y., Wang, J., Zhang, C.,
Wang, Z., Yau, S.K.S., Lin, Z., et al. (2024). MetaGPT: Meta programming
for multi-agent collaborative framework. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/
forum?id=VtmBAGCN7o.
131. Zhang, H., Du, W., Shan, J., Zhou, Q., Du, Y., Tenenbaum, J.B., Shu, T., and
Gan, C. (2024). Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with large
language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=EnXJfQqy0K.
132. Liang, T., He, Z., Jiao, W., Wang, X., Wang, Y., Wang, R., Yang, Y., Tu, Z.,
and Shi, S. (2023). Encouraging divergent thinking in large language
models through multi-agent debate. Preprint at arXiv.
133. Fu, Y., Peng, H., Khot, T., and Lapata, M. (2023). Improving language
model negotiation with self-play and in-context learning from ai feedback. Preprint at arXiv.
134. Mandi, Z., Jain, S., and Song, S. (2023). Roco: Dialectic multi-robot
collaboration with large language models. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10610855.
135. Saha, S., Hase, P., and Bansal, M. (2023). Can language models teach
weaker agents? teacher explanations improve students via theory of
mind. Preprint at arXiv.
136. Williams, R., Hosseinichimeh, N., Majumdar, A., and Ghaffarzadegan, N.
(2023). Epidemic modeling with generative agents. Preprint at arXiv.
137. Park, J.S., Popowski, L., Cai, C., Morris, M.R., Liang, P., and Bernstein,
M.S. (2022). Social simulacra: Creating populated prototypes for social
computing systems. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 1–18. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3526113.3545616.
138. Parisi, A., Zhao, Y., and Fiedel, N. (2022). Talm: Tool augmented language models. Preprint at arXiv.
139. Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dessi, R., Raileanu, R., Lomeli, M., Hambro,
E., Zettlemoyer, L., Cancedda, N., and Scialom, T. (2023). Thirty-seventh
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. https://
openreview.net/forum?id=Yacmpz84TH.
140. Nakano, R., Hilton, J., Balaji, S., Wu, J., Ouyang, L., Kim, C., Hesse, C.,
Jain, S., Kosaraju, V., Saunders, W., et al. (2021). Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. Preprint at arXiv.
141. Shen, Y., Song, K., Tan, X., Li, D., Lu, W., and Zhuang, Y. (2023). HuggingGPT: Solving AI tasks with chatGPT and its friends in hugging
face. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems. https://openreview.net/forum?id=yHdTscY6Ci.
142. Hu, C., Fu, J., Du, C., Luo, S., Zhao, J., and Zhao, H. (2023). Chatdb: Augmenting llms with databases as their symbolic memory. Preprint at arXiv.
143. Coley, C.W., Thomas, D.A., III, Lummiss, J.A.M., Jaworski, J.N., Breen,
C.P., Schultz, V., Hart, T., Fishman, J.S., Rogers, L., Gao, H., et al.
(2019). A robotic platform for flow synthesis of organic compounds
informed by ai planning. Science 365, eaax1566. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.aax1566.
144. Ahn, M., Brohan, A., Brown, N., Chebotar, Y., Cortes, O., David, B., Finn,
C., Fu, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., et al. (2022). Do as i can, not
as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. Preprint at arXiv.

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6149

ll
OPEN ACCESS

145. Ramesh, A., Pavlov, M., Goh, G., Gray, S., Voss, C., Radford, A., Chen,
M., and Sutskever, I. (2021). Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR), pp. 8821–8831.
146. Hu, E.J., shen, y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., and
Chen, W. (2022). LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.
In International Conference on Learning Representations. https://
openreview.net/forum?id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
147. Qian, C., Cong, X., Yang, C., Chen, W., Su, Y., Xu, J., Liu, Z., and Sun, M.
(2023). Communicative agents for software development. Preprint
at arXiv.
148. Zhou, X., Li, G., and Liu, Z. (2023). Llm as dba. Preprint at arXiv.
149. Zhu, X., Chen, Y., Tian, H., Tao, C., Su, W., Yang, C., Huang, G., Li, B., Lu,
L., Wang, X., et al. (2023). Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable
agents for open-world enviroments via large language models with
text-based knowledge and memory. Preprint at arXiv.
150. Neelakantan, A., Xu, T., Puri, R., Radford, A., Han, J.M., Tworek, J., Yuan,
Q., Tezak, N., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., et al. (2022). Text and code embeddings by contrastive pre-training. Preprint at arXiv.
151. Zhong, W., Guo, L., Gao, Q., Ye, H., and Wang, Y. (2024). Memorybank:
Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38, pp. 19724–
19731. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i17.29946. https://ojs.aaai.org/
index.php/AAAI/article/view/29946.
152. Dettmers, T., Pagnoni, A., Holtzman, A., and Zettlemoyer, L. (2023).
QLoRA: Efficient finetuning of quantized LLMs. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. https://openreview.net/
forum?id=OUIFPHEgJU.
153. Meng, K., Bau, D., Andonian, A., and Belinkov, Y. (2022). Locating and
editing factual associations in gpt. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
154. Zhang, N., Yao, Y., Tian, B., Wang, P., Deng, S., Wang, M., Xi, Z., Mao, S.,
Zhang, J., Ni, Y., et al. (2024). A comprehensive study of knowledge editing for large language models. Preprint at arXiv.
155. Rana, K., Haviland, J., Garg, S., Abou-Chakra, J., Reid, I., and Suenderhauf, N. (2023). Sayplan: Grounding large language models using 3d
scene graphs for scalable robot task planning. In 7th Annual Conference
on Robot Learning. https://openreview.net/forum?id=wMpOMO0Ss7a.
156. Chiang, W.L., Li, Z., Lin, Z., Sheng, Y., Wu, Z., Zhang, H., Zheng, L.,
Zhuang, S., Zhuang, Y., Gonzalez, J.E., et al. (2023). Vicuna: An opensource chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. https://
vicuna.lmsys.org.
157. Li, D., Rawat, A.S., Zaheer, M., Wang, X., Lukasik, M., Veit, A., Felix, Y., and
Kumar, S. (2023). Large language models with controllable working memory. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL, A.
Rogers, J. Boyd-Graber, and N. Okazaki, eds. (Association for Computational Linguistics), pp. 1774–1793. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.112. https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.112.
158. Kojima, T., Gu, S.S., Reid, M., Matsuo, Y., and Iwasawa, Y. (2022). Large
language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 22199–22213.
159. Liu, B., Jiang, Y., Zhang, X., Liu, Q., Zhang, S., Biswas, J., and Stone, P.
(2023). Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. Preprint at arXiv.
160. Dagan, G., Keller, F., and Lascarides, A. (2023). Dynamic planning with a
llm. Preprint at arXiv.
161. Zhang, Z., Yao, Y., Zhang, A., Tang, X., Ma, X., He, Z., Wang, Y., Gerstein,
M., Wang, R., Liu, G., et al. (2023). Igniting language intelligence: The
hitchhiker’s guide from chain-of-thought reasoning to language agents.
Preprint at arXiv.
162. Zhong, S., Huang, Z., Gao, S., Wen, W., Lin, L., Zitnik, M., and Zhou, P.
(2024). Let’s think outside the box: exploring leap-of-thought in large language models with creative humor generation. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Confer-

6150 Cell 187, October 31, 2024

Perspective
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (The IEEE
Publications) https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01258.
163. Sundara Raman, S., Cohen, V., Rosen, E., Idrees, I., Paulius, D., and
Tellex, S. (2022). Planning with large language models via corrective
re-prompting. In NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision Making
Workshop.
164. Yao, S., Dian, Y., Zhao, J., Shafran, I., Griffiths, T.L., Cao, Y., and Narasimhan, K.R. (2023). Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large
language models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. https://openreview.net/forum?id=5Xc1ecxO1h.
165. Wang, Y., Jiang, Z., Chen, Z., Yang, F., Zhou, Y., Cho, E., Fan, X., Lu, Y.,
Huang, X., and Yang, Y. (2023). Recmind: Large language model powered agent for recommendation. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.
18653/v1/2024.findings-naacl.271.
166. Zhou, D., Schärli, N., Le Hou, J.W., Scales, N., Wang, X., Schuurmans,
D., Cui, C., Bousquet, O., Le, Q.V., and Chi, E.H. (2023). Least-to-most
prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models. In
The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=WZH7099tgfM.
167. Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q.V., Chi, H., Narang, S.,
Chowdhery, A., and Zhou, D. (2023). Self-consistency improves chain
of thought reasoning in language models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/
forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.
168. Besta, M., Blach, N., Kubicek, A., Gerstenberger, R., Podstawski, M.,
Gianinazzi, L., Gajda, J., Lehmann, T., Niewiadomski, H., Nyczyk, P.,
et al. (2024). Graph of Thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large
language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38, pp. 17682–17690. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i16.
29720.
169. Hao, S., Gu, Y., Ma, H., Hong, J.J., Wang, Z., Wang, D.Z., and Hu, Z.
(2023). Reasoning with language model is planning with world model.
In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.507. https://
openreview.net/forum?id=VTWWvYtF1R.
170. Madaan, A., Tandon, N., Gupta, P., Hallinan, S., Gao, L., Wiegreffe, S.,
Alon, U., Dziri, N., Prabhumoye, S., Yang, Y., et al. (2023). Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=S37hOerQLB.
171. Song, C.H., Wu, J., Washington, C., Sadler, B.M., Chao, W.-L., and Su, Y.
(2023). Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents
with large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2998–3009.
172. Chen, X., Lin, M., Schärli, N., and Zhou, D. (2024). Teaching large language
models to self-debug. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=KuPixIqPiq.
173. Wang, R., Zelikman, E., Poesia, G., Pu, Y., Haber, N., and Goodman, N.D.
(2023). Hypothesis search: Inductive reasoning with language models.
Preprint at arXiv.
174. McCoy, R.T., Yao, S., Friedman, D., Hardy, M., and Griffiths, T.L. (2023).
Embers of autoregression: Understanding large language models
through the problem they are trained to solve. Preprint at arXiv.
175. Wu, Z., Qiu, L., Ross, A., Akyürek, E., Chen, B., Wang, B., Kim, N., Andreas, J., and Kim, Y. (2023). Reasoning or reciting? exploring the capabilities and limitations of language models through counterfactual tasks.
Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.102.
176. Nye, M., Andreassen, A.J., Gur-Ari, G., Michalewski, H., Austin, J.,
Bieber, D., Dohan, D., Lewkowycz, A., Bosma, M., Luan, D., et al.
(2021). Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation
with language models. Preprint at arXiv.

ll
Perspective
177. Chen, J., and Mueller, J. (2023). Quantifying uncertainty in answers from
any language model via intrinsic and extrinsic confidence assessment.
Preprint at arXiv.
178. Tian, K., Mitchell, E., Zhou, A., Sharma, A., Rafailov, R., Yao, H., Finn, C.,
and Manning, C.D. (2023). Just ask for calibration: Strategies for eliciting
calibrated confidence scores from language models fine-tuned with human feedback. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing. https://openreview.net/forum?id=g3faCfrwm7.
179. Kuhn, L., Gal, Y., and Farquhar, S. (2023). Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for uncertainty estimation in natural language generation.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=VD-AYtP0dve.
180. Shafer, G., and Vovk, V. (2008). A tutorial on conformal prediction.
J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9, 371–421.
181. Shafer, G., and Vovk, V. (2008). A tutorial on conformal prediction.
J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9, 371–421. http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/shafer08a.
html.
182. Perez, E., Ringer, S., Lukosiute, K., Nguyen, K., Chen, E., Heiner, S., Pettit, C., Olsson, C., Kundu, S., Kadavath, S., et al. (2023). Discovering language model behaviors with model-written evaluations. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL, A. Rogers, J. BoydGraber, and N. Okazaki, eds. (Association for Computational Linguistics),
pp. 13387–13434. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.847.
https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.847.
183. Qi, X., Zeng, Y., Xie, T., Chen, P.Y., Jia, R., Mittal, P., and Henderson, P.
(2024). Fine-tuning aligned language models compromises safety, even
when users do not intend to!. In The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=hTEG
yKf0dZ.

OPEN ACCESS

189. Liu, X., Hao, Y., Zhang, H., Xu, Y., Lei, X., Lai, H., Gu, Y., Ding, H., Men, K.,
Yang, K., et al. (2024). Agentbench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations. https://
openreview.net/forum?id=zAdUB0aCTQ.
190. Corsello, S.M., Bittker, J.A., Liu, Z., Gould, J., McCarren, P., Hirschman,
J.E., Johnston, S.E., Vrcic, A., Wong, B., Khan, M., et al. (2017). The drug
repurposing hub: a next-generation drug library and information
resource. Nat. Med. 23, 405–408. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4306.
191. Cohen-Boulakia, S., Belhajjame, K., Collin, O., Chopard, J., Froidevaux,
C., Gaignard, A., Hinsen, K., Larmande, P., Le Bras, Y.L., Lemoine, F.,
et al. (2017). Scientific workflows for computational reproducibility in
the life sciences: Status, challenges and opportunities. Future Gener.
Comput. Syst. 75, 284–298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2017.
01.012.
192. Lamprecht, A.L., Garcia, L., Kuzak, M., Martinez, C., Arcila, R., Martin Del
Pico, E.M., Dominguez Del Angel, V., Van De Sandt, S., Ison, J., Martinez,
P.A., et al. (2020). Towards fair principles for research software. Data Sci.
3, 37–59. https://doi.org/10.3233/DS-190026.
193. Zitnik, M., Nguyen, F., Wang, B., Leskovec, J., Goldenberg, A., and Hoffman, M.M. (2019). Machine learning for integrating data in biology and
medicine: Principles, practice, and opportunities. Inf. Fusion 50, 71–91.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2018.09.012. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1566253518304482.
194. Office of Science And Technology Policy (2023). Ai bill of rights. https://
www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/ai-bill-of-rights/.

184. Wei, A., Haghtalab, N., and Steinhardt, J. (2023). Jailbroken: How does
LLM safety training fail? In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. https://openreview.net/forum?id=jA235JGM09.

195. Guha, N., Lawrence, C., Gailmard, L.A., Rodolfa, K., Surani, F., Bommasani, R., Raji, I., Cuéllar, M.F., Honigsberg, C., Liang, P., et al. (2023). Ai
regulation has its own alignment problem: The technical and institutional
feasibility of disclosure, registration, licensing, and auditing. George
Wash. Law Rev. 11, 4634443. https://ssrn.com/abstract=4634443.

185. Bommasani, R., Liang, P., and Lee, T. (2023). Holistic evaluation of language models. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1525, 140–146. https://doi.org/10.
1111/nyas.15007.

196. Yang, Z., Raman, S.S., Shah, A., and Tellex, S. (2024). Plug in the safety
chip: Enforcing constraints for llm-driven robot agents. In International
Conference on Robotics and Automation.

186. Mialon, G., Fourrier, C., Wolf, T., LeCun, Y., and Scialom, T. (2024). GAIA:
a benchmark for general AI assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=fibxvahvs3.

197. Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., de Oliveira Pinto, H.P., Kaplan,
J., Edwards, H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G., et al. (2021). Evaluating large language models trained on code. Preprint at arXiv.

187. Srivastava, A., Rastogi, A., Rao, A., Shoeb, A.A.M., Abid, A., Fisch, A.,
Brown, A.R., Santoro, A., Gupta, A., Garriga-Alonso, A., et al. (2023).
Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=uyTL5Bvosj.

198. Liang, J., Huang, W., Xia, F., Xu, P., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., Florence, P.,
and Zeng, A. (2023). Code as policies: Language model programs for
embodied control. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) (IEEE Publications), pp. 9493–9500. https://doi.org/
10.1109/ICRA48891.2023.10160591.

188. Huang, Q., Vora, J., Liang, P., and Leskovec, J. (2023). Benchmarking
large language models as ai research agents. Preprint at arXiv. https://
api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263671541.

199. Schwartz, S., Yaeli, A., and Shlomov, S. (2023). Enhancing trust in llmbased ai automation agents: New considerations and future challenges.
In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Cell 187, October 31, 2024 6151

