Real-time experiment-theory closed-loop interaction
for autonomous materials science
Haotong Liang1, Chuangye Wang1, Heshan Yu1,*, Dylan Kirsch1, Rohit Pant1, Austin McDannald2,†, A. Gilad
Kusne1,2,#, Ji-Cheng Zhao1, Ichiro Takeuchi1,3
1

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20889, USA
3
Maryland Quantum Materials Center, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
*Present address: School of Microelectronics, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 300072
† ORCID: 0000-0002-3767-926X
# ORCID: 0000-0001-8904-2087
2

Abstract
Iterative cycles of theoretical prediction and experimental validation are the cornerstone of the modern
scientific method. However, the proverbial “closing of the loop” in experiment-theory cycles in practice
are usually ad hoc, often inherently difficult, or impractical to repeat on a systematic basis, beset by the
scale or the time constraint of computation or the phenomena under study. Here, we demonstrate
Autonomous MAterials Search Engine (AMASE), where we enlist robot science to perform self-driving
continuous cyclical interaction of experiments and computational predictions for materials exploration.
In particular, we have applied the AMASE formalism to the rapid mapping of a temperature–composition
phase diagram, a fundamental task for the search and discovery of new materials. Thermal processing
and experimental determination of compositional phase boundaries in thin films are autonomously
interspersed with real-time updating of the phase diagram prediction through the minimization of Gibbs
free energies. AMASE was able to accurately determine the eutectic phase diagram of the Sn-Bi binary
thin-film system on the fly from a self-guided campaign covering just a small fraction of the entire
composition – temperature phase space, translating to a 6-fold reduction in the number of necessary
experiments. This study demonstrates for the first time the possibility of real-time, autonomous, and
iterative interactions of experiments and theory carried out without any human intervention.

Autonomous experimentation driven by active learning —the field of machine learning (ML) dedicated to
dynamically steering the sequence of experiments —is poised to revolutionize scientific discovery at
large(1–11). At the core of active learning is Bayesian optimization (BO), whose implementation is
increasingly popular in research laboratory settings for rapid navigation of hitherto unknown response
functions of physical systems under study. BO is a sequential decision-making process grounded in the
framework of Bayesian inference that iteratively updates the underlying with the observed evidence at
each iteration(12). Further integration of automated experiment platforms with BO based active learning
1

algorithm has led to the dawn of fully autonomous research systems(6, 13–16), where dynamic decisionmaking vis-a-vis the task to be performed at each cycle is now squarely in the hands of robot scientists(17).
One of the most challenging yet worthy areas of autonomous research systems is materials discovery.
Despite technical difficulties associated with live integration of synthesis and characterization tasks, the
inherently iterative nature of materials exploration cycles (as exemplified in the Edisonian approach) is
highly conducive to closed-loop autonomous systems, and they have been successfully demonstrated for
synthesis of inorganic quantum dots(18) and optimization of organic solar cells(19). As a major benefit of
autonomous systems, there is a significant reduction in the overall number of necessary experimental
iterations to arrive at the optimum solutions in live runs. An essential task associated with materials
discovery is the rapid mapping of compositional phase diagrams and identifications of phase boundaries.
High-throughput mapping of phase diagrams has successfully led to discoveries of various functional
materials(20, 21), and a Bayesian autonomous workflow for streamlined mapping of phase boundaries in
combinatorial libraries has previously led to the discovery of a best-in-class phase change memory
material(22).
From electronic structure calculations and molecular dynamic simulations to predictions of structural
materials and quantum phenomena, the field of computational materials science has witnessed
staggering advances in recent years, which in turn have led to the era of high-throughput computational
materials design and screening. Despite such advances, there naturally still remains a divide between
theory and experiment. To scale the divide, there have been efforts to incorporate computational models
into the autonomous workflow by including steps where separately-prepared or existing computational
data are compared with experiment in order to guide the next iteration (1, 23, 24). In the framework of
Bayesian optimization, the incorporation of physical models to the probabilistic model, or specifically,
Gaussian process (GP), is typically implemented at the level of kernel functions(25), mean function(26),
inputs and outputs(24), and acquisition function(27). Dynamic modification of the physical prior or theory
as an iterative part of the autonomous closed-loop is still largely limited in scope. Exciting yet challenging
are live autonomous cycles involving materials synthesis where there is time-constraint due to kinetics
and, as a result, there is experimental urgency associated with chemical reactions taking place in real time.
We hereby report the successful demonstration of the Autonomous MAterials Search Engine (AMASE)
where alternating live interaction of experimental observation and computational modeling is driven by
Bayesian active learning informing and correcting each other without interruptions on the fly. In particular,
we have implemented the system for the task of self-charting a thin-film eutectic phase diagram. The
AMASE system performs threaded cyclical tasks of composition selection via active learning, x-ray
diffraction measurement and its analysis, thermal processing of samples, interspersed with GP
classification for phase boundary determination and thermodynamic calculations. The continuously
updating live computation of Gibbs free energies combined with Bayesian autonomous experiments has
allowed us to arrive at the complete thin-film phase diagram after sampling just a small fraction of the
entire composition-temperature phase space. One live run constructing the Sn-Bi thin-film phase diagram
is completed in just over 8 hours in an ambient lab environment, translating to 6-fold reduction in the
total number of experiments compared to an exhaustive and time-consuming grid mapping (in the same
range), which is undesirable in air for materials containing such common yet volatile chemical elements.
Thermodynamics is a pervasive science fundamental to virtually all scientific disciplines. CALPHAD
(CALculation of PHAse Diagram as implemented in the Thermo-Calc (TC) software(28)) is a naturally
2

iterative method of adjusting the parameters that describe the Gibbs energies of various phases in a multielement materials system to construct a thermodynamic phase diagram model as a best fit to the available
experimental phase equilibrium data. We perform continuous live updating of the computed phase
diagram (Fig. 1a), which in turn directly informs the next composition and temperature to experimentally
determine the locations of phase boundaries (i.e., solvus and liquidus). The experiment is x-ray diffraction
(XRD) determinations of a thin-film composition spread, which encompasses a segment of the Sn-Bi binary
compositional phase diagram (Fig. 1), undergoing variable temperature conditions (see Supplementary
Section 7 for experimental setup). More details of CALPHAD models are given in Section 4 of the
Supplementary Materials.
While the bulk Sn-Bi phase diagram is well-documented(29–32), it is well known that thin films in general
can display significant departure in thermodynamic behavior from their bulk counterparts. Thin films
possess inherent two-dimensional structures placing stringent limitations on grain size due to diffusion
kinetics and grain growth, accompanied by high rates of evaporation as well as stress from the substrate,
which can also shift phase diagrams. The specific scenario for the task at hand is to decipher the Sn-Bi
thin-film (≈0.5 m thick) phase diagram, so that it can serve as a processing blueprint for fabrication of
thin-film devices incorporating superconducting SnxBi1-x (33).
Structural phase mapping using composition spreads has become a lynchpin for exploration of advanced
materials(22, 34, 35) and for probing mechanisms of exotic physical phenomena(36), as phase diagram
navigation is central to the process of search and discovery. The marriage of the high-throughput platform
with active learning then is a natural one, as an acquisition function can serve as an efficient beacon for
steering across a well-ordered array of samples, eliminating the necessity to exhaustively comb through
the entire composition map.
In order to showcase the ability of the approach to accurately create the entire phase diagram from just
a limited sampling of experimental data and computation, we have deliberately prepared a thin-film
composition spread which covers only a small fraction of the Sn-rich side of the Sn-Bi phase diagram,
namely 0.71 < x < 0.95 in SnxBi1-x (Fig. 1b). As general features of any binary phase diagram, the only
assumption we make prior to the run is that the solvus, solidus, and liquidus lines lie “somewhere” within
this region of the phase diagram, consistent with the bulk phase diagram, and it is the task of AMASE to
accurately locate them in the present thin-film system. Fig. 1c is a photo of the experimental setup, where
the composition spread wafer is placed on a variable-temperature diffractometer with position control,
so that different composition spots and temperatures can be dialed in by AMASE via remote control from
a main computer. Because of the irreversible nature of the thermal process here, we start the mapping at
a low/ambient temperature and continue to move up in temperature as dictated by active learning.
Previously, we have implemented a number of different analysis techniques to automatically detect and
quantify peak features from diffraction patterns while removing background noise(37, 38). Here, we have
developed a materials-agnostic ML analysis protocol that can identify diffraction peaks and monitor peak
shifting in a series of diffraction patterns as a function of various parameters. Based on the You Only Look
Once (YOLO) object detection model from computer vision(39, 40), we developed a 1D YOLO model that
can quickly capture 2 positions and full widths at half maximum (FWHM) of all major diffraction peaks
from an XRD pattern and track their change in intensity and position as the pattern evolves as a function
of composition (due to changing chemical pressure) and temperature (due to thermal expansion). (see
Supplementary Sections 1, 2, and 3 for more details on the modified YOLO model). The key task of the
3

model is to help identify the phase boundary, where the intensity of a main tracked peak decreases to
below the background noise level.

Fig. 1. AMASE (autonomous materials search engine) is applied to the mapping of the Sn-Bi thin-film phase diagram.
a, The AMASE performs real-time experiment-calculation interaction for phase diagram determination. b, A photo
of the experimental setup: a thin-film composition spread is mounted on a variable temperature stage inside an inhouse x-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8) equipped with a scanning stage. c, The region and general features (solvus
and liquidus lines indicated by blue and orange lines, respectively) of the thin-film eutectic binary (Sn-Bi) phase
diagram AMASE is tasked to find and track experimentally on a composition spread focused on the Sn-rich region

4

(atomic concentration of Sn of 71 % to 95 %). The eutectic point composition to be determined by the AMASE process
is assumed to be outside the composition range of the spread. d, XRD diffraction pattern of Sn0.71Bi0.29 at T = 50 °C.
Key diffraction peaks used for tracking are indicated.

We initialize the AMASE process by measuring and analyzing the XRD of endpoint compositions of the
spread, namely at Sn0.71Bi0.29 and Sn0.95Bi0.05 (SnxBi1-x) at room temperature (Fig. 1d). The peaks identified
with the modified YOLO model are indexed via the search/match algorithm using Inorganic Crystal
Structure Database (ICSD)(41). As the most prominent characteristic peaks, the Bi (012) peak and the Sn (101) peak are chosen here for finding and tracking the solvus line compositions and the liquidus line
compositions, respectively.
Following the initialization, the AMASE workflow commences by launching an isothermal phaseboundary-search-routine for solvus composition identification at 50 °C as the starting low temperature,
which was chosen, so that we cover both sides of the solvus line composition (between the -Sn + Bi twophase region and the single phase -Sn region) (Fig. 1b) in the composition range of the spread at the
starting point of the workflow.
At the core of the phase-boundary-search-routine is the variational Gaussian process classifier (VGPC),
which is a robust non-parametric probabilistic ML model(42, 43) that uses CALPHAD evaluated phase
boundary as its prior to predict the true phase boundary in a probabilistic approach. At a fixed
temperature, the inputs are the compositions and the corresponding intensity of the Bi (012) peak from
the YOLO fit of diffraction patterns. The output is the probabilistic classification of the constituent phases
at a given composition and temperature, which triggers the next XRD measurement at the composition
location where the VGPC mean curve shows a drastic change (i.e., first-order phase transition), indicating
the predicted position of the boundary. This cycle continues until convergence is reached, where at the
predicted solvus composition, the Bi (012) peak (and thus the phase) disappears. In order to confirm
convergence and signal the end of the routine at a fixed temperature, XRD measurements at both sides
of convergent composition with x = ±0.01 are carried out.
Fig. 2 shows this converging process of the phase-boundary-search-routine through multiple iterations at
130 °C. The red squares indicate locations on the spread where successive measurements have identified
compositions where the Bi (012) peak is present, and thus are in the two-phase region. The sharp
transition of the VGPC mean-curve indicates the phase boundary is at an atomic Sn concentration of 77 %
(x = 0.77) at this temperature. On the left side of the boundary (i.e., lower x for SnxBi1-x), x-ray
measurements have confirmed absence of the Bi (012) peak indicated by purple squares. On average, the
phase-boundary-search-routine takes six XRD iterations and 40 minutes to converge at a given
temperature.
Fig. 3 shows the autonomous interactive block diagram of the AMASE workflow. Once the solvus
composition is experimentally identified at a particular temperature, this info is fed to CALPHAD which
proceeds to calculate the entire phase diagram by minimizing the Gibbs free energy functions of three
phases in the system, namely, -Sn, Bi, and liquid here (See Supplementary Sections 4 and 6). Using the
Redlich-Kister polynomial up to the second order as the two primary fitting parameters per phase in the
Gibbs functions, the Thermo-Calc optimization is performed ten times to arrive at a phase diagram with

5

uncertainty as to the position of the phase boundaries. This computational step typically takes less than
one minute.

Fig. 2. Isothermal phase boundary (solvus) search process performed autonomously using the YOLO-based
diffraction peak detection method (left) and accompanying variational Gaussian process classifier (VGPC) (right)
across the SnxBi1-x composition spread (0.71 < x < 0.95). Here at 130 °C, the Bi (012) diffraction peak is tracked as

6

composition is varied. The left panels show the diffraction peak with the YOLO fit after each measurement, and the
right panels show the VGPC result after each measurement, where the updated boundary prediction with the
uncertainty envelope (95 percent confidence intervals) is plotted. Red and purple squares indicate the XRD
measurement result after each successive iteration plotted against composition denoting “left” and “right” side of
the boundary, respectively. Going from the top panels to the bottom, this particular process took 5 measurements
after the initial setup (top panels) to find the boundary, where a sharp boundary with minimal uncertainty was found
at Sn0.77Bi0.23 (at 130 °C) as shown on the bottom right panel, and the diffraction pattern shows a peak below the
noise level for Sn0.78Bi0.22 (left second from bottom).

As the key following step, AMASE then decides the next temperature to perform the phase-boundarysearch-loop. The uncertainty in the calculated solvus line composition at different temperatures is used
in the acquisition function in the exploration mode within the window (set to be 30 °C here) above the
last temperature where the phase-boundary-search-routine was carried out. The size of the window is
chosen such that at least five temperature levels would be surveyed through the entire range of
temperature from 50 to 200 °C. This important step works in such a way as to eliminate the possibility of
having to perform the experiment at every 10 °C increment, thus substantially reducing the overall
number of isothermal boundary-search-routines. The temperature on the stage is raised to the next
selected value, and the workflow continues with the VGPC boundary-search-routine at the composition
given by the calculated phase diagram as the prior (see Supplementary Section 4.2), thus completing the
experiment-computation thermodynamic phase modeling loop.
In this manner, the AMASE cycle walks up the solvus line driven by the experiment-calculation interactive
loop until both VGPC and the CALPHAD models predict vanishing of the solvus phase boundary at a
temperature within the 30 °C window above the sampled temperature. This signals the end point of the
solvus line. Another Gaussian process classifier is implemented as the end-point detection scheme (see
Supplementary Section 5), and upon confirmation of arrival at the eutectic temperature, the mapping of
the solvus line is terminated.

Fig. 3. The block diagram shows the steps in the closed-loop cycles starting at room temperature. The process at
each temperature takes approximately 40 min. for performing x-ray diffraction at automatically selected few spots
on a thin-film composition spread and GP classification to identify the solvus composition. The next temperature to
sample is determined autonomously via active learning. After the eutectic isotherm is reached, the process continues

7

by jumping to find and track the liquidus line. For the present run, the entire process starts with a Phase Boundary
Search Loop at 50 ℃, with no initial input from CALPHAD or the bulk phase diagram to begin with.

As captured in the present AMASE block diagram (Fig. 3), the next step is to jump to the liquidus searchroutine mode. The lowest temperature of the liquidus within the composition, as dictated by the mostrecently updated thermodynamic database prior, becomes the starting temperature of the next phaseboundary-search-routine, which would undergo the same process as above. The process continues until
200 °C, which is the high temperature operation limit of the heater stage used.

Fig. 4. AMASE at work. (A timelapse video showing the measurement process is included in Supplementary Section
8) The top right panel shows our experimentally measured data points with red color representing the β-Sn + Bi
phase and purple color representing the pure Sn phase. The left side panel shows our TC uncertainty values at each
temperature, and two horizontal lines show the allowed search range or temperature window. The TC uncertainty

8

is the standard deviation of the sampled phase boundary composition at each temperature. The middle panel plots
the posterior mean and uncertainty prediction of our variational Gaussian process classifier (VGPC). The marker
indicates the current measured composition. The XRD pattern and the YOLO + tracker detected peak are shown in
the bottom panel, mainly used for visual inspection.

Fig. 4 shows a snapshot of the time-lapse video capture (video link available in Supplementary Section 8)
of one complete AMASE run, which took 8 hours and 22 minutes. The run consisted of 66 XRD
measurements carried out at 11 temperature points.
We compare this against various other approaches of rapidly mapping a thin-film phase diagram. An
exhaustive “grid measurements” of the spread from 50 °C to 200 °C with 10 °C increment would have
required 400 XRD measurements, which would have taken over 60 hours of continuous run. Given the
volatile nature of Bi and Sn thin films, such an extended run in air at elevated temperatures would have
“damaged” the Sn-Bi film significantly through evaporation, converting the film into off-stoichiometric
oxides, etc.
With this time saving, any possible remaining damage/modification of the film, namely extra oxide
formation at the surface, is below the detection limit of the diffraction in a 5 min set for each
measurement. Under the current experimental condition, we estimate the thickness of such an oxide
layer to be less than 5-10 nm. This amount (equivalent volume fraction of 1-2%) is not expected to affect
the solved phase diagram constructed for ≈0.5 micron thick films.
We have also considered a variation of the current AMASE implementation, where we perform GP only
to navigate the same given composition spread, and then apply CALPHAD afterwards to extrapolate to
the entire phase diagram. As discussed in a detailed comparison below, but we see that it is not better
than the current interleaving GP and CALPHAD-driven approach.

9

Fig. 5. The comparison of bulk vs. the AMASE thin-film phase diagram. The region inside the green dotted line is the
phase space accessed by the AMASE process, with the green dots denoting the phase boundaries experimentally
determined by the process. L stands for the liquid phase. The thin-film Sn-Bi phase diagram obtained by the AMASE
live run is shown in blue lines, while the bulk Sn-Bi phase diagram is given in red lines(32). (Inset) Zoomed-in
comparison of bulk vs. thin-film phase diagram near the eutectic point, together with the experimentally determined
eutectic point. The boxed region is marked with a black dotted line in the main plot. The blue shadow is the prediction
envelope of the AMASE phase diagram extracted from calculated phase diagrams sampled 50 times. Here, the
envelope shows the minimum and maximum temperature at each composition of the sampled phase diagrams. The
error bar of the experimentally determined eutectic point indicates uncertainty from the WDS composition
measurement and the grid size of the grid search experiment. An overlap between the error of the eutectic point
measurement and the envelope indicates good agreement between the AMASE prediction and the experiment.

Fig. 5 shows the AMASE-generated thin-film phase diagram, which indeed exhibits a significant deviation
from the known bulk phase diagram(32). The region within the green box is the phase space sampled by
the current run. The deviation between the bulk and thin-film phase diagrams can be explained by the
additional contribution to the Gibbs free energy from surface tension of small grains(44), which are widely
reported in nanoscale binary systems such as Ag-Cu nanoparticles(45), and Al/Me/Al films (Me= In, Sn, Bi,
Pb)(46). In order to verify the generated thin-film phase diagram, we have performed an independent
determination of the eutectic point with a separate thin-film spread sample focused near the x = 0.5
composition. We applied the same YOLO + tracker method to identify the Bi and β-Sn phases in the phase
mixture region and mapped the liquidus lines in proximity of the eutectic point. As shown in the zoomedin inset of Fig. 5, the experimentally determined eutectic point in this separate thin-film experiment is
found at a Sn mole percent of 55.5 % ± 1.5 % (x = 0.555 ± 0.015) and a temperature of 133.2 °C ± 10 °C
(406.4 K ± 10 K), which is within 3 % of the AMASE-predicted eutectic point of 53.3 % ± 2% (x = 0.533 ±

10

0.02), 133.1 °C ± 1 °C (406.3 K ± 1 K), in contrast to the bulk eutectic point of 59.5 % (x = 0.595) at 140.7 °C
(413.8 K). There is good agreement between the AMASE phase diagram and the validation experiment.

Discussion
The AMASE setup is applicable to investigating general systems that show deviation in the free energy
landscape going from bulk to thin-film systems. The VGPC + CALPHAD prior provides a flexible output that
can easily represent mixture and/or pure phases via multiclass binary classification. The Gibbs phase rule
is softly constrained in the CALPHAD prior, which allows the system to work not only in ideal samples but
also in scenarios such as the formation of a metastable phase. The utility of VGPC as the central framework
brings flexibility for modeling complex phase diagrams with line compound(s) or isostructural regions that
can break the continuity of the phase field. The foundational assumption of the workflow is the availability
of the bulk phase diagram (i.e., it has free energy functional forms of the bulk system). With modification
of the acquisition function, the AMASE workflow can be applied to more complex systems, such as ternary
phase diagrams and certain regions of multicomponent systems that are of interest to the broad materials
science community.
While detecting an unknown/new phase has been shown to be possible in many previous studies(47–49),
it is generally difficult to characterize the crystal structure from thin-film XRD data. It is also hard to kickstart a new phase in CALPHAD assessment when thermodynamic properties are lacking. In future work, a
machine learning-based phases recognition system could be employed alongside the AMASE system to
actively monitor phase composition. Such a system could replace the YOLO peak detection + tracking
workflow if it is shown robust enough. In addition, the predictions from first-principles calculation
databases such as the Materials Projects and Aflowlib can be linked or pre-loaded into the AMASE system
to anticipate potential new phases.
There have been reports of several autonomous workflows for similar purposes, i.e., materials
optimization, and some of them had featured inner loops(25, 50), but to the best of our knowledge, the
AMASE workflow is the only one which integrates computational and experimental tasks with
demonstrated operations in live runs. A key feature of our multi-loop workflow is that updating CALPHAD
calculation from the main loop (performed every 40 min) is also used to guide the inner Phase Boundary
Search Loop.
To further demonstrate the advantage of having an interleaved interaction between the computational
physical model (CALPHAD) and the experimental determination of phase boundaries, we have developed
a separate workflow where tracking and choosing the phase boundary is entirely performed by a baseline
GP approach. We have extracted key statistical metrics to compare the performance of this approach vs
AMASE (Figure 6). Each method was simulated 20 times using the final derived phase diagram from the
AMASE live run. Here, the GP approach is explicitly programmed to search for solvus and liquidus lines.
Methods are benchmarked against the total number of points used to navigate through the phase diagram
and the number of measured points per temperature. As seen in Fig. 6(a), the total number of measured
points with the AMASE method is significantly lower than that for the GP approach. We attribute this
difference to the ability of the CALPHAD to extrapolate the phase diagram features properly. The GP is
found to behave more stochastically in comparison to the AMASE method, indicated by its wider
distribution of the total measured points and a larger tail in the distribution of measured points per
11

temperature (Fig 6(b) & (c)). The high frequency observed for bin 0 in Fig 6 (b) is due to the fact that
AMASE is able to “skip” many temperature points because of the basic extrapolative nature of CALPHAD,
which is simply not possible with the GP approach.

Fig. 6. Performance comparison between AMASE and GP workflow in two statistical parameters. a, The histogram
of the total number of measured points for each method took to navigate through the simulated phase diagram for
20 simulated runs. b and c, The histogram of the number of measured points per temperature of the phaseboundary-search-loop for the AMASE and GP workflow, respectively. Dashed lines indicate the average number of
measured points of the histogram.

Conclusion
We have demonstrated an entirely new mode of materials exploration, where experimental and
computational tasks are intertwined autonomously in a timed cyclical manner continually informing each
other. The phase diagram of the thin-film Bi-Sn binary system is rapidly constructed with the proposed
AMASE workflow and the predicted eutectic temperature is verified by a follow-up experiment. As
demonstrated here, this allows researchers to probe regions of multi-dimensional parameter space which
are outside the reach of physical conditions of typical investigations. Exciting natural extensions of the
AMASE operation here include incorporation of other types of computational work such as density
functional theory and rapid autonomous mapping of convex hulls, as well as coupling of threaded
experiment-theory cycles in research areas beyond materials science. Our work also shows that one can
create complete autonomous materials exploration systems solely based on relatively inexpensive
existing tools in the lab, thus demonstrating the utility and impact of autonomous science for the general
public.

Data and the code availability
Data that supports the finding of this study as well as the code have been made available as a
part of the manuscript.

12

Acknowledgements
This project was funded by ONR MURI N00014-17-1-2661, AFOSR FA9550-14-10332, and NIST
70NANB17H301.

Author contributions
I.T., A.G.K., and J.Z. conceived the project. I.T. supervised the experiments. H.L. wrote the code for the
experiment and analysis. D.K. and R.P. fabricated the composition-spread samples. H.L. and H.Y. carried
out the autonomous variable temperature x-ray experiment. C.W performed the CALPHAD modeling
under the supervision of J.Z. I.T., H.L., C.W., J.Z., A.G.K., and A.M. analyzed the results. I.T., H.L., C.W. and
J.Z. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.

Disclaimer
The identification of any commercial product or trade name does not imply endorsement or
recommendation by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). These opinions,
recommendations, findings, and conclusions do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of NIST or the
United States Government.

References
1.

N. J. Szymanski, P. Nevatia, C. J. Bartel, Y. Zeng, G. Ceder, Autonomous and dynamic precursor
selection for solid-state materials synthesis. Nat. Commun. 14, 6956 (2023).

2.

V. Stanev, K. Choudhary, A. G. Kusne, J. Paglione, I. Takeuchi, Artificial intelligence for search and
discovery of quantum materials. Commun. Mater. 2, 105 (2021).

3.

E. Stach, B. DeCost, A. G. Kusne, J. Hattrick-Simpers, K. A. Brown, K. G. Reyes, J. Schrier, S. Billinge,
T. Buonassisi, I. Foster, C. P. Gomes, J. M. Gregoire, A. Mehta, J. Montoya, E. Olivetti, C. Park, E.
Rotenberg, S. K. Saikin, S. Smullin, V. Stanev, B. Maruyama, Autonomous experimentation
systems for materials development: A community perspective. Matter 4, 2702–2726 (2021).

4.

J. Chang, P. Nikolaev, J. Carpena-Núñez, R. Rao, K. Decker, A. E. Islam, J. Kim, M. A. Pitt, J. I.
Myung, B. Maruyama, Efficient Closed-loop Maximization of Carbon Nanotube Growth Rate using
Bayesian Optimization. Sci. Rep. 10, 9040 (2020).

5.

Y. Zhang, D. W. Apley, W. Chen, Bayesian Optimization for Materials Design with Mixed
Quantitative and Qualitative Variables. Sci. Rep. 10, 4924 (2020).

6.

M. Seifrid, R. Pollice, A. Aguilar-Granda, Z. Morgan Chan, K. Hotta, C. T. Ser, J. Vestfrid, T. C. Wu,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, Autonomous Chemical Experiments: Challenges and Perspectives on
Establishing a Self-Driving Lab. Acc. Chem. Res. 55, 2454–2466 (2022).

7.

K. Wang, A. W. Dowling, Bayesian optimization for chemical products and functional materials.
Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng. 36, 100728 (2022).

8.

P. Honarmandi, V. Attari, R. Arroyave, Accelerated materials design using batch Bayesian
optimization: A case study for solving the inverse problem from materials microstructure to
process specification. Comput. Mater. Sci. 210, 111417 (2022).

9.

P. M. Attia, A. Grover, N. Jin, K. A. Severson, T. M. Markov, Y.-H. Liao, M. H. Chen, B. Cheong, N.
13

Perkins, Z. Yang, P. K. Herring, M. Aykol, S. J. Harris, R. D. Braatz, S. Ermon, W. C. Chueh, Closedloop optimization of fast-charging protocols for batteries with machine learning. Nature 578,
397–402 (2020).
10.

S. Sun, A. Tiihonen, F. Oviedo, Z. Liu, J. Thapa, Y. Zhao, N. T. P. Hartono, A. Goyal, T. Heumueller,
C. Batali, A. Encinas, J. J. Yoo, R. Li, Z. Ren, I. M. Peters, C. J. Brabec, M. G. Bawendi, V. Stevanovic,
J. Fisher, T. Buonassisi, A data fusion approach to optimize compositional stability of halide
perovskites. Matter 4, 1305–1322 (2021).

11.

M. M. Noack, P. H. Zwart, D. M. Ushizima, M. Fukuto, K. G. Yager, K. C. Elbert, C. B. Murray, A.
Stein, G. S. Doerk, E. H. R. Tsai, R. Li, G. Freychet, M. Zhernenkov, H.-Y. N. Holman, S. Lee, L. Chen,
E. Rotenberg, T. Weber, Y. Le Goc, M. Boehm, P. Steffens, P. Mutti, J. A. Sethian, Gaussian
processes for autonomous data acquisition at large-scale synchrotron and neutron facilities. Nat.
Rev. Phys. 3, 685–697 (2021).

12.

R. Garnett, Bayesian Optimization (Cambridge University Press, 2023).

13.

M. Abolhasani, E. Kumacheva, The rise of self-driving labs in chemical and materials sciences.
Nat. Synth. 2, 483–492 (2023).

14.

M. B. Rooney, B. P. MacLeod, R. Oldford, Z. J. Thompson, K. L. White, J. Tungjunyatham, B. J.
Stankiewicz, C. P. Berlinguette, A self-driving laboratory designed to accelerate the discovery of
adhesive materials. Digit. Discov. 1, 382–389 (2022).

15.

B. P. MacLeod, F. G. L. Parlane, T. D. Morrissey, F. Häse, L. M. Roch, K. E. Dettelbach, R. Moreira,
L. P. E. Yunker, M. B. Rooney, J. R. Deeth, V. Lai, G. J. Ng, H. Situ, R. H. Zhang, M. S. Elliott, T. H.
Haley, D. J. Dvorak, A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. E. Hein, C. P. Berlinguette, Self-driving laboratory for
accelerated discovery of thin-film materials. Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz8867 (2023).

16.

L. M. Roch, F. Häse, C. Kreisbeck, T. Tamayo-Mendoza, L. P. E. Yunker, J. E. Hein, A. Aspuru-Guzik,
ChemOS: An orchestration software to democratize autonomous discovery. PLoS One 15,
e0229862 (2020).

17.

B. Burger, P. M. Maffettone, V. V Gusev, C. M. Aitchison, Y. Bai, X. Wang, X. Li, B. M. Alston, B. Li,
R. Clowes, N. Rankin, B. Harris, R. S. Sprick, A. I. Cooper, A mobile robotic chemist. Nature 583,
237–241 (2020).

18.

R. W. Epps, M. S. Bowen, A. A. Volk, K. Abdel-Latif, S. Han, K. G. Reyes, A. Amassian, M.
Abolhasani, Artificial Chemist: An Autonomous Quantum Dot Synthesis Bot. Adv. Mater. 32,
2001626 (2020).

19.

S. Langner, F. Häse, J. D. Perea, T. Stubhan, J. Hauch, L. M. Roch, T. Heumueller, A. Aspuru-Guzik,
C. J. Brabec, Beyond Ternary OPV: High-Throughput Experimentation and Self-Driving
Laboratories Optimize Multicomponent Systems. Adv. Mater. 32, 1907801 (2020).

20.

S. Fujino, M. Murakami, V. Anbusathaiah, S.-H. Lim, V. Nagarajan, C. J. Fennie, M. Wuttig, L.
Salamanca-Riba, I. Takeuchi, Combinatorial discovery of a lead-free morphotropic phase
boundary in a thin-film piezoelectric perovskite. Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 202904 (2008).

21.

J. Cui, Y. S. Chu, O. O. Famodu, Y. Furuya, J. Hattrick-Simpers, R. D. James, A. Ludwig, S.
Thienhaus, M. Wuttig, Z. Zhang, I. Takeuchi, Combinatorial search of thermoelastic shapememory alloys with extremely small hysteresis width. Nat. Mater. 5, 286–290 (2006).
14

22.

A. G. Kusne, H. Yu, C. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Hattrick-Simpers, B. DeCost, S. Sarker, C. Oses, C. Toher, S.
Curtarolo, A. V Davydov, R. Agarwal, L. A. Bendersky, M. Li, A. Mehta, I. Takeuchi, On-the-fly
closed-loop materials discovery via Bayesian active learning. Nat. Commun. 11, 5966 (2020).

23.

A. McDannald, M. Frontzek, A. T. Savici, M. Doucet, E. E. Rodriguez, K. Meuse, J. Opsahl-Ong, D.
Samarov, I. Takeuchi, W. Ratcliff, A. G. Kusne, On-the-fly autonomous control of neutron
diffraction via physics-informed Bayesian active learning. Appl. Phys. Rev. 9, 21408 (2022).

24.

A. E. Gongora, K. L. Snapp, E. Whiting, P. Riley, K. G. Reyes, E. F. Morgan, K. A. Brown, Using
simulation to accelerate autonomous experimentation: A case study using mechanics. iScience
24, 102262 (2021).

25.

S. Ament, M. Amsler, D. R. Sutherland, M.-C. Chang, D. Guevarra, A. B. Connolly, J. M. Gregoire,
M. O. Thompson, C. P. Gomes, R. B. van Dover, Autonomous materials synthesis via hierarchical
active learning of nonequilibrium phase diagrams. Sci. Adv. 7, eabg4930 (2021).

26.

Y. Liu, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, K. P. Kelley, R. Vasudevan, M. Ziatdinov, S. V Kalinin,
Autonomous scanning probe microscopy with hypothesis learning: Exploring the physics of
domain switching in ferroelectric materials. Patterns 4, 100704 (2023).

27.

K. M. Roccapriore, S. V Kalinin, M. Ziatdinov, Physics Discovery in Nanoplasmonic Systems via
Autonomous Experiments in Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy. Adv. Sci. 9, 2203422
(2022).

28.

J.-O. Andersson, T. Helander, L. Höglund, P. Shi, B. Sundman, Thermo-Calc & DICTRA,
computational tools for materials science. Calphad 26, 273–312 (2002).

29.

M. H. Braga, J. Vizdal, A. Kroupa, J. Ferreira, D. Soares, L. F. Malheiros, The experimental study of
the Bi–Sn, Bi–Zn and Bi–Sn–Zn systems. Calphad 31, 468–478 (2007).

30.

S. W. Yoon, H. M. Lee, A thermodynamic study of phase equilibria in the Sn-Bi-Pb solder system.
Calphad 22, 167–178 (1998).

31.

H. Ohtani, K. Ishida, A thermodynamic study of the phase equilibria in the Bi-Sn-Sb system. J.
Electron. Mater. 23, 747–755 (1994).

32.

B.-J. Lee, C.-S. Oh, J.-H. Shim, Thermodynamic assessments of the Sn-In and Sn-Bi binary systems.
J. Electron. Mater. 25, 983–991 (1996).

33.

M. V Likholetova, E. V Charnaya, E. V Shevchenko, Y. A. Kumzerov, Superconductivity of the Bi–Sn
Eutectic Alloy. Phys. Solid State 63, 232–236 (2021).

34.

S. Ament, M. Amsler, D. R. Sutherland, M.-C. Chang, D. Guevarra, A. B. Connolly, J. M. Gregoire,
M. O. Thompson, C. P. Gomes, R. B. van Dover, Autonomous materials synthesis via hierarchical
active learning of nonequilibrium phase diagrams. Sci. Adv. 7, eabg4930 (2023).

35.

S. Sarker, R. Tang-Kong, R. Schoeppner, L. Ward, N. Al Hasan, D. G. Van Campen, I. Takeuchi, J.
Hattrick-Simpers, A. Zakutayev, C. E. Packard, A. Mehta, Discovering exceptionally hard and wearresistant metallic glasses by combining machine-learning with high throughput experimentation.
Appl. Phys. Rev. 9, 11403 (2022).

36.

J. Yuan, Q. Chen, K. Jiang, Z. Feng, Z. Lin, H. Yu, G. He, J. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Zhang,
M. Qin, Z. G. Cheng, N. Tamura, Y. Yang, T. Xiang, J. Hu, I. Takeuchi, K. Jin, Z. Zhao, Scaling of the
15

strange-metal scattering in unconventional superconductors. Nature 602, 431–436 (2022).
37.

A. G. Kusne, D. Keller, A. Anderson, A. Zaban, I. Takeuchi, High-throughput determination of
structural phase diagram and constituent phases using GRENDEL. Nanotechnology 26, 444002
(2015).

38.

V. Stanev, V. V. Vesselinov, A. G. Kusne, G. Antoszewski, I. Takeuchi, B. S. Alexandrov,
Unsupervised phase mapping of X-ray diffraction data by nonnegative matrix factorization
integrated with custom clustering. npj Comput. Mater. 2018 41 4, 1–10 (2018).

39.

J. Redmon, A. Farhadi, YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement. doi: 10.48550/arxiv.1804.02767
(2018).

40.

J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, A. Farhadi, “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object
Detection” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (IEEE
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2016;
https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.91), pp. 779–788.

41.

D. Zagorac, H. Müller, S. Ruehl, J. Zagorac, S. Rehme, Recent developments in the Inorganic
Crystal Structure Database: theoretical crystal structure data and related features. J. Appl.
Crystallogr. 52, 918–925 (2019).

42.

M. Opper, C. Archambeau, The Variational Gaussian Approximation Revisited. Neural Comput.
21, 786–792 (2009).

43.

A. G. de G. Matthews, M. van der Wilk, T. Nickson, K. Fujii, A. Boukouvalas, P. León-Villagrá, Z.
Ghahramani, J. Hensman, GPflow: A Gaussian Process Library using TensorFlow. J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 18, 1–6 (2017).

44.

M. Łapiński, P. Dróżdż, M. Gołębiowski, P. Okoczuk, J. Karczewski, M. Sobanska, A. Pietruczik, Z.
R. Zytkiewicz, R. Zdyb, W. Sadowski, B. Kościelska, Thermal Instability of Gold Thin Films. Coatings
2023, Vol. 13, Page 1306 13, 1306 (2023).

45.

M. Z. Chu, Y. Z. Qin, T. Xiao, W. Shen, T. Su, C. H. Hu, C. Tang, Thermodynamic reassessment of
the Ag–Cu phase diagram at nano-scale. Calphad 72, 102233 (2021).

46.

N. T. Gladkikh, S. I. Bogatyrenko, A. P. Kryshtal, R. Anton, Melting point lowering of thin metal
films (Me = In, Sn, Bi, Pb) in Al/Me/Al film system. Appl. Surf. Sci. 219, 338–346 (2003).

47.

W. B. Park, J. Chung, J. Jung, K. Sohn, S. P. Singh, M. Pyo, N. Shin, K.-S. Sohn, Classification of
crystal structure using a convolutional neural network. IUCrJ 4, 486–494 (2017).

48.

N. J. Szymanski, S. Fu, E. Persson, G. Ceder, Integrated analysis of X-ray diffraction patterns and
pair distribution functions for machine-learned phase identification. npj Comput. Mater. 10, 45
(2024).

49.

F. Oviedo, Z. Ren, S. Sun, C. Settens, Z. Liu, N. T. P. Hartono, S. Ramasamy, B. L. DeCost, S. I. P.
Tian, G. Romano, A. Gilad Kusne, T. Buonassisi, Fast and interpretable classification of small X-ray
diffraction datasets using data augmentation and deep neural networks. npj Comput. Mater. 5,
60 (2019).

50.

A. E. Gongora, B. Xu, W. Perry, C. Okoye, P. Riley, K. G. Reyes, E. F. Morgan, K. A. Brown, A
Bayesian experimental autonomous researcher for mechanical design. Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz1708
16

(2020).

17

Supplementary Materials
1. YOLO-based model
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have proven to be effective in performing complex object detection.
Among the many architectures, the YOLO architecture(1, 2) has a simplistic form while still having versatile
performance and low computational cost. The idea of YOLO is to attach a detection head that transforms
activations of a hidden layer in a CNN to the bounding box coordinates, an objectiveness score, and other
auxiliary properties such as classes. Here, we employ a U-Net-like(3) CNN model as the backbone of the
YOLO model, and the activation of its last hidden layer is used to create the prediction. We choose the
box anchor style for our bounding box so that the model predicts the offset of the center and width of all
the 1D bounding boxes. When training the model, given a set of ground truth bounding boxes, we assign
them to the predicted bounding box by a function B:
B(𝑓𝑖 (𝒙), 𝒚) = argmax𝑦j (IOU(𝑓𝑖 (𝒙), 𝑦𝑗 ))

(1)

The Interception over Union (IOU) for 1D box is defined as:
𝑏

𝑏

𝑏

𝑏

IOU(𝑏1 , 𝑏2 ) = max (0, max (𝑏1c + 1w , 𝑏2c + 2w ) − min (𝑏1𝑐 − 1w , 𝑏2c − 2w))
2

2

2

(2)

2

The final loss function is:
L(𝒙, 𝒚) = ∑𝑖∈𝑆(|𝐵(𝑓𝑖 (𝒙), 𝒚)|11 ) + ∑𝑖∈𝑆 𝑔𝑖 (𝒙)log(𝑔𝑖 (𝒙)) + ∑𝑖∉𝑆(1 − 𝑔𝑖 (𝒙)) (log(1 − 𝑔𝑖 (𝒙)))

(3)

Where 𝒙 is the input pattern as a vector, y are the true bounding boxes (a matrix of multiple rows of box
center and box width), 𝑓𝑖 (𝒙) is the i-th bounding box prediction, and 𝑔𝑖 (𝒙) is the confidence score of i-th
the predicted bounding box, 𝑦𝑗 is the j-th ground truth bounding box, 𝑏𝑖 is the i-th bounding box
parameterized by its center 𝑏𝑖c and width 𝑏𝑖w . The model was trained on 20000 simulated randomly
distributed Voigt peaks for 10 epochs with a linear learning rate schedule (1 × 10−3 , 1 × 10−5 ). The
parameter range that characterizes three different modes of Voigt peaks is shown in Table 1:
Table 1. Voigt peaks parameter ranges for three different modes.
Amplitude
(a.u.)

Sigma
(°)

Gamma
(°)

Height FWHM Center Number
(a.u.)
(°)
(°) of Peaks

Crystalline 0.0066-2.661 0.027-0.555 0.027-0.555 0-1
0.1-2 20-120
Amorphous 0.665-3.991 1.388-4.165 1.388-4.165 0-0.3
3-10
25-40
Substrate 0.007-1.331 0.0003-0.0138 0.0003-0.0138 5-20 0.01-0.05 20-120

0-15
0-5
0-5

The simulated patterns have a 2θ range of 20 ° to 120 ° with a 0.1 ° step size. Gaussian noise and
background profile (a second-order polynomial) are dynamically generated and added to the simulated
pattern during training.

1

The trained model is characterized by the mean Average Precision (mAP) metric, which measures how
much the predicted bounding box overlaps with the true box and the reliability of each prediction. The
higher the mAP, the higher the performance. The mean Average Precision of the YOLO model is calculated
to be 0.78, indicating an excellent performance over the task considering general mAP is around 0.6 for
the COCO dataset(4). The Non-Maximum Suppress (NMS) algorithm(5) is used to select the final bounding
box from the raw prediction. The NMS algorithm works by iteratively selecting the remaining most
confident boundary box prediction and removing nearby boxes with IOU higher than the defined NMS
threshold. The process repeats until all the remaining box has a confidence level (0 to 1, where 0 is low
confidence and 1 is high confidence) lower than the defined threshold. Here, we set the IOU threshold
level to 0.1 and confidence level to 0.5 during the inference. After applying the NMS, the most certain
predictions are drawn from models and are ready to be used as a prior to fit the x-ray diffraction (XRD)
pattern. The two parameters of the NMS algorithm can be tuned based on the transferred tasks or the
testing part of the training data.

2. U-Net Active Noise Cancelling
The presence of noise is inevitable when dealing with experimental diffraction data. Traditional workflows
use filtering or interpolation to separate the smooth part from the spiky noise. The signal sharpness and
the intensity usually change during the process, which eventually introduces a new set of artifacts. Here,
we used a 1D U-Net(3) to predict the actual noise pattern given the raw XRD pattern. To implement such
a model, a self-supervised scheme in which we let the model predict the undistorted pattern from the
noisy input. The loss function is given by:
1

L(𝑥, 𝑥′) = |(𝑥′ + 𝑓(𝑥′, 𝜃)) − 𝑥|1

(4)

where 𝑥 ′ is the noise-augmented diffraction pattern, 𝑓(𝑥′, 𝜃) is the generated anti-noise pattern from UNet with parameters 𝜃, and the 𝑥 is the smooth simulated ground true pattern. Smooth spectrums are
generated from inorganic crystal structural database (ICSD)(6) to mimic the actual data distribution of the
XRD patterns. Noise patterns are sampled from an independent Gaussian distribution. The model is
trained on 69500 simulated patterns for five epochs. The average residual of prediction in the validation
dataset is calculated to be 2 × 10−5 .

3. Raw Diffraction Pattern Analysis
3.1 U-Net Noise Extraction
Besides extracting the main features from the diffraction pattern, the underlying noise that follows the
Poisson statistics can tell us the quality of the measurement. Instead of recognizing the noise from the
post-fitted residual pattern, we used a U-Net model (see Section 2 for details of the model)(7) with the
same backbone as the YOLO model to predict the noise pattern from raw diffraction patterns. The training
dataset is generated from an inorganic crystal structural database (ICSD)(6) with Topas software(8), and
noise is generated from the Gaussian distribution. This model is transferred to a real environment without

2

further training. The global noise level is then extracted from the estimated noise pattern and used as a
factor to scale the diffraction pattern with some predefined noise-to-signal ratio in mind. Here, the noiseto-signal ratio is set to be 50 for the best model performance. An example using the same XRD pattern is
shown in Fig. S1a. The anti-noise pattern generated from our model correctly describes the distribution
of the actual noise signal. The smoothed pattern, created by adding the anti-noise pattern to the original
pattern, retains all the sharp features from the original pattern, allowing better estimation of the noise
level and visualization.

3.2 YOLO Peak Detector
XRD patterns of polycrystalline thin-film materials carry information about the existence of particular
phases. Thus, by extracting individual diffraction peaks from the XRD pattern and matching them with
peaks calculated from reference structures, one can tell whether peaks appear or not. The extracting step
has non-trivial solutions due to peak overlapping, broadening, and shifting. Using the conventional peak
finding algorithm based on searching local maximum would fail at heavy peak overlapping region and/or
broad peaks from poor crystalline samples. Previously, neural networks have been used to classify
symmetry groups, prototype structures, or phases from raw XRD patterns(9–11). Data-driven methods of
phase mapping have been developed for scenarios with a sufficient number of XRD patterns (e.g., from a
combinatorial library), with non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)(12) or generative adversarial
network (GAN)(13). However, none of these methods can provide information for individual peaks when
the number of XRD pattern is low. Here, we propose using the 1D YOLO convolutional neural network(1,
14) to bridge the gap for machine learning-based phase mapping methods (see Section 1 for details of the
model). Given a min-max normalized diffraction pattern, the models output multiple pairs of peak centers
and widths that enclose the diffraction peaks where the maximum is the product of the extracted noise
level and the user-defined ideal signal-to-noise ratio. The model was trained on simulated patterns with
randomly distributed Voigt peaks. The dataset contains various modes that cover the materials from
poor/good crystalline phases, substrate, and amorphous peaks. The model was successfully transferred
to a real environment achieving transfer learning(15). At each measurement, we apply the YOLO network
in conjunction with the non-maximum suppression (NMS) algorithm(5) to detect peak positions with high
prediction confidence. These peak positions would be used as priors for fitting a numerical model, which
further refines the peak positions and shape parameters. An example of the YOLO model’s output is
shown in Fig. S1b, where the red rectangle shows the predicted bounding boxes’ centers and widths. The
predicted bounding boxes cover all observable peaks from human eyes, and widths (2 × FWHM) of peaks
are accurately captured.

3.3 Numerical Fitting
For an accurate extraction of peak parameters, one may need to rely on numerical models. The diffraction
peaks are modeled by Voigt peaks, and their parameters are initialized by predictions from the YOLO
neural network. The background signal is modeled by a Chebyshev Polynomial and is initialized from
regions with no peaks. The degree of the Chebyshev Polynomial is randomly sampled from 4 to 7. The
numerical model is optimized via the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm implemented by Scikit-learn and
lmfit python libraries(16, 17). The fitting quality is monitored by examining the relative standard deviation
of fitted parameters. A new iteration of fitting with a different Chebyshev Polynomial degree would be
conducted if the previous run fails to converge. Compared with computationally heavy Bayesian inference
approaches(18, 19), our method starts at a healthier position, resulting in much less computational

3

overhead during the optimization process. An example of the optimized Voigt peaks and background
models is shown in Fig. S1c. Using the prior from the YOLO model, the optimization process takes less
than a second. The optimized Voigt peaks and the polynomial background fit nicely to the original pattern,
providing a solid foundation for the subsequent analysis.

Fig. S1. An example of XRD pattern analysis. A) Output from our U-Net Denoiser. The anti-noise, original pattern and smoothed
patterns are shown in different colors. Detected peaks’ positions from the YOLO model. The detected peaks’ centers and widths
are represented by red rectangles’ center and width. C) Optimized numerical model of the pattern. The optimized Voigt peaks
are shown in shaded regions. The background component is shown in a dashed line.

3.4 Phase identification
Indexing the extracted peaks is essential to determine whether a phase is present. For room temperature
samples, we can either hand-label or use reference structures from the database to assign the material
and plane family to which the peak belongs. To study the peak shift with respect to the position at room
temperature as a function of composition and temperature, we employed multiple data-efficient
Gaussian process (GP) models to predict the peak positions of previously unknown conditions
(composition and temperature). This GP model uses two different kernels on temperature and
composition separately. A Matern52 kernel is used to model the complex relationship in the composition
space, and a linear kernel is used for the temperature space to model the linear part of the thermal
expansion. The final kernel is the product of these two kernels. Here, we use a mean function of a constant

4

value equal to the peak location of the reference structure at room temperature. The target peak is
identified if a peak is located in the predicted position and the peak’s amplitude is larger than a threshold
value. The threshold is usually determined from the noise level extracted before. A peak with an amplitude
higher than the noise level is classified as the target phase, and vice versa for the opposite case.

4. Thermodynamics-Based Phase Boundary Search
4.1 Thermodynamics Models and Uncertainty
By enlisting the automatic analysis of diffraction patterns discussed above, we are able to run autonomous
physics-based phase mapping to explore the temperature-dependent phase diagram of a thin-film Bi-Sn
binary system. The system is known for its eutectic composition with a low eutectic temperature. The
phase diagram exhibits rapid changes around the eutectic temperature, imposing difficulty for a
continuous machine-learning model to predict this trend purely from data. This problem is bridged by
combining experimental data with theory prediction prior, which comes from CALPHAD (CALculation of
PHAse Diagrams) calculations.
CALPHAD is an approximation to the thermodynamic equilibrium theory in the same fashion that the
density functional theory (DFT) is an approximation to the quantum mechanics theory. The difference is
that the model parameters in DFT have all been assessed beforehand, and no additional fitting is usually
required whereas the model parameters in CALPHAD are incomplete and need to be assessed from
experimental data system by system. The stability of a material or phase is usually quantified by its Gibbs
free energy as a function of temperature, pressure, and composition. A common practice for modeling
the Gibbs free energy in binary systems is to use the substitutional solution model. The theoretical
thermodynamic model of the Bi-Sn thin-film system is modeled using the Thermo-Calc (TC) software(20–
25). The substitutional solution model for the molar Gibbs energy of a phase θ in a binary system can be
expressed as (25–27):
θ = 𝑥 𝑜𝐺 + 𝑥 𝑜𝐺 + 𝑅𝑇[𝑥 𝑙𝑛(𝑥 ) + 𝑥 𝑙𝑛(𝑥 )] + 𝑥 𝑥 𝐿
𝐺𝑚
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1 2 12

(5)

where 𝑥𝑖 denotes the mole fraction of element i, R is the gas constant, 𝑜 𝐺𝑖 is the Gibbs energy of the pure
element i whose value can be written as a power series of temperature T in the following general equation
by selecting a reference state denoted by stable element reference (SER) for element i at 298.15K (see
Section 6 for detailed expression of SER):
𝑜 𝐺 = 𝑎 + 𝑎 𝑇 + 𝑎 𝑇ln(𝑇) + 𝑎 𝑇 2 + 𝑎 𝑇 −1 + 𝑎 𝑇 3 +···,
𝑖
0
1
2
3
4
5

𝑇1 < 𝑇 < 𝑇2

(6)

L12 describes the binary interaction between the two elements, and is expressed as Redlich-Kister
polynomial:
𝐿12 = ∑𝑘𝑣=0(𝑥1 − 𝑥2 )𝑣 · 𝑣𝐿12 = ∑𝑘𝑣=0(𝑥1 − 𝑥2 )𝑣 · (𝑣 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑣𝑏𝑖 𝑇)

5

(7)

θ becomes:
Therefore, by plugging Eq. (7) into Eq. (5), the equation of 𝐺𝑚
θ = 𝑥 𝑜𝐺 + 𝑥 𝑜𝐺 + 𝑅𝑇[𝑥 𝑙𝑛(𝑥 ) + 𝑥 𝑙𝑛(𝑥 )] + 𝑥 𝑥 ∑𝑘 (𝑥 − 𝑥 )𝑣 · (𝑣 𝑎 + 𝑣 𝑏 𝑇)
𝐺𝑚
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1 2 𝑣=0 1
2
𝑖
𝑖

(8)

Due to the microstructure and melting point difference between the thin-film and bulk alloys, the Gibbs
energy function of pure elements can vary. Therefore, a single constant parameter is added to the Gibbs
energy function of the BCT phase of Sn to account for a change of its melting point, which can better
explain the thermodynamic behavior in the thin-film Sn-Bi system. For the binary interaction parameters,
only the 0th order (𝑣 = 0) and 1st order (𝑣 = 1) in 𝐿12 are used in the assessment of solid phases, and one
more parameter of 2nd order (𝑣 = 2) is used in assessing the liquid phase; which is quite common for
CALPHAD thermodynamic assessments. Since only experimental phase boundary data are available here,
we use one adjustable constant 𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑗 and ignore the 𝑣 𝑏𝑖𝑗 term in 𝐿12 , which is again quite common during
CALPHAD assessments. We thus have two parameters in the solid phase and three parameters in the
liquid phase in describing the binary interactions. Three phases are predetermined to exist in the
experiment, the body-centered tetragonal (BCT) phase of pure Sn, the rhombohedral (RHO) phase of pure
Bi, and the liquid phase. Therefore, 8 adjustable parameters as represented by G(LIQUID, Sn, Bi; 0),
G(LIQUID, Sn, Bi; 1), G(LIQUID, Sn, Bi; 2), oG(BCT, Sn), G(BCT, Sn, Bi; 0), G(BCT, Sn, Bi; 1), G(RHO, Sn ,Bi; 0),
and G(RHO, Sn, Bi; 1) are employed in the thermodynamic model assessment.
Given experimentally determined phase boundaries (e.g., β-Sn-Bi solvus and β-Sn liquidus line) and Gibbs
free energy functions of pure Sn and Bi, the substitutional solution model can be updated through
optimization. The updated model is used to evaluate a new Sn-Bi phase diagram which extrapolates phase
boundary information into “uncharted” composition and temperature regions. The uncertainty of the new
prediction is quantified via Monte Carlo method which is great mean for evaluating uncertainty from an
intractable probability distribution. The parameters of the CALPHAD model are converted into i.i.d
random variables with a Gaussian distribution. The mean and standard deviation of each random variable
is obtained from the VALUE and REL.STD.DEV field from the output of the Thermocalc PARROT
optimization operation. We samples multiple set of parameters from the Gaussian distribution and use
them to indirectly sample phase diagrams. The uncertainty of the phase boundary could be quantified as:
2

ξ
𝑈 ξ (𝑇) = ∑𝑛𝑖=1 (τ𝑖 (𝑇) − τ̅ξ (𝑇))

(9)

ξ
Where 𝑈 ξ (𝑇) is the variance-measured of the phase boundary ξ at temperature T, τ𝑖 (𝑇) is the i-th
sampled TC-predicted composition of the phase boundary ξ at temperature 𝑇 and 𝜏̅ξ (𝑇) is the mean of

these predictions. The uncertainty describes the discrepancy among n = 10 sampled phase diagrams. To
decrease the uncertainty of predictions in the thermodynamic modeling, it is most rewarding to jump to
the temperature with the highest uncertainty to perform the next cycle of measurement.

4.2 Active Learning for Phase Boundary Search
By leveraging phase diagram computation using CALPHAD, we deploy a Gaussian Process classifier
conditioned on the output of the thermodynamic model to decide the subsequent composition and the
system temperature to measure. Using the most recently evaluated phase boundary lines as prior
information and experimentally determined phase compositions, we fit a Variational Gaussian Process
(VGP) classifier(28–30) using the GPFlow Library(31) for each phase to predict the most probable phase
boundary composition. We construct a custom kernel:

6

𝐾(𝑥c , 𝑥T , 𝑥p , 𝑥c′ , 𝑥T′ , 𝑥p′ ) = Matern32(𝑥c , 𝑥c′ ) ⋅ Matern32(𝑥T , 𝑥T′ ) + RBF(𝑥p , 𝑥p′ )

(10)

where 𝑥c , 𝑥T , 𝑥p and 𝑥c′ , 𝑥T′ , 𝑥p′ are the chemical composition, temperature, and phase information
modelled via TC of two data points, respectively. Here, we simplified the formulation of 𝑥p for this binary
system into a binary value. For the solvus line, we use 𝑥p = 0 to represent the Bi + Sn mixture phase
region, and 𝑥p = 1 to represent the pure Sn region. Similarly, for the liquidus line, we set 𝑥p = 0 for liquid
+ Sn or pure Sn regions and 𝑥p = 1 for the liquid only region. Since it is a binary system, one VGP classifier
model is sufficient to describe the phase around the phase boundary of the solvus or liquidus line. One
can easily generalize the formulation of 𝑥p into multiclass one-hot encoding where multiple binary
variables can be used to represent the state of different phases in the system. Matern32 is the Matérn
3/2 kernel (ν = 3/2) and RBF is the radial basis function kernel(32). The VGP classifier model is fitted against
the available experimental data and the latest version of the TC assessed phase diagram to update its
posterior phase diagram prediction, which used the same formulation as the TC prior.
Using the prediction of the VGP model, samples at the predicted phase boundary position were measured,
and the model is iteratively updated until the model prediction converges. At each iteration VGP
prediction, a custom acquisition function α(𝒙) = −|𝑚(𝒙) − 0.5| was used to actively search for phase
boundary. 𝑚(𝒙) is the mean VGP classifier prediction at data point 𝒙 with composition 𝑥𝑐 , temperature
𝑥T , and phase information 𝑥p . The next datapoint to sample is: 𝒙∗ = arg max α(𝒙), where 𝑋 is a set of
𝒙∈𝑋

datapoints with temperature 𝑇. The prediction is converged if the next datapoint 𝒙∗ didn’t get changed
in the consecutive iteration. This converged datapoints is considered the phase boundary at the current
temperature if its neighboring compositions show drastic changes in phase composition. The phase
composition, in this case, is actively monitored by multiple GP trackers discussed in Section 3. If the
experimental evidence disagrees with the model prediction, a sample with a randomly selected
composition is measured to steer the VGP model out of the convergence. With up-to-the-minute
measured phase boundary data, the thermodynamic model is re-adjusted by optimization to match the
experimental observation.
Once the phase boundary at the current temperature is experimentally determined, the system turns to
measure the phase boundaries at other temperatures. Since raising the temperature would cause
irreversible change to the sample, the system temperature is only increased. Here, we select the
temperature with the highest 𝑈 ξ (𝑇) within a user-defined range as our new system temperature (up to
30 °C above the temperature where the boundary search
took place). The subsequent phase boundary composition
measured at this new temperature would efficiently reduce
the uncertainty in the TC predictions using the reassessed
thermodynamic model.

Fig. S2. Detailed workflow of the AMASE software.
The process is orchestrated by the main node in the
center that handles the storage and data acquisition.
The active learning (AL) agent uses the structured
data from the main node to guide the experiment
while the experiment node collects experimental and
Thermo-Calc node provides theoretical prediction.

The schematic of the workflow is shown in Fig. S2. The
AMASE software is driven by the active learning agent,
which acquires input from the database and queries the
experiment node for the following most informative data
point. The data manager not only stores data points but
also coordinates with the XRD instrument and TC to finish
the request from the active learning agent. The XRD
machine is controlled via a custom-built socket connection,

7

and the raw experimental data is transferred back to the main node for analysis. The aforementioned
YOLO-based model, in conjunction with the numerical model, is used to de-convolute the diffraction
pattern and extract peak parameters. These parameters, combined with reference structures, provide
experimental evidence for our active learning agent and the CALPHAD model to update themselves. At
each temperature, the phase boundary is rapidly discovered through XRD by an active learning agent and
experimentally confirmed by checking the nearby compositions. The process is terminated when the
active learning agent determines there is no phase boundary in the current temperature level. In the
current setup, the goal is to discover the liquidus and solvus boundaries on the Sn side of the phase
diagram. When scanning through a boundary, instead of increasing the temperature in a fixed step, we
sample the predicted phase diagram to locate the temperature with the most uncertain boundary
composition and then gradually heat the system toward that temperature at a pace of 10°C/min. When
switching from the solvus to liquidus line search, we use the phase diagram predicted by TC (20) to search
for the temperature at which the liquidus line first appears and directly heat to that temperature. These
two approaches further reduce the overall experimentation time with little cost in information lost.
Compared with the traditional grid search method, our approach results in ≈6 times speed up and is
critical to prevent oxidation in the high-temperature range in air.

5. End-point detection scheme
The cyclical process of phase boundary search and temperature adjustment continues until both VGP
classifier and the thermodynamic model predicted phase boundaries disappear at higher temperatures.
A VGP classifier-guided scanning method was used to experimentally confirm the vanishing of the phase
boundary. This prediction works similarly to the VGP classifier model but without the use of the
thermodynamic model TC prior. The kernel used in this VGP classifier is:
𝐾(𝑥c , 𝑥T , 𝑥c′ , 𝑥T′ , ) = Matern32(𝑥c , 𝑥c′ ) ⋅ Matern32(𝑥T , 𝑥T′ )

(11)

where 𝑥c , 𝑥T and 𝑥c′ , 𝑥T′ are the chemical compositions and the system temperatures of two data points,
respectively. At each iteration, the VGP classifier predicts a plausible phase boundary location, and an XRD
measurement is performed to investigate the composition location. If the scanning method finds evidence
of a phase boundary, the AMASE will roll back to the search routine and continue the mapping. Otherwise,
once VGP classifier predicts there is no phase boundary at the current temperature, AMASE can then
switch to a new phase boundary (liquidus) that only appears in higher temperatures, and a new cycle is
initiated for this boundary. Here, the modified exploration acquisition function is used:
if
𝑚(𝒙) − 2√𝑣(𝒙) < 0.5 < 𝑚(𝒙) + 2√𝑣(𝒙)
α(𝒙) = {𝑣(𝒙)
0
else
where 𝑚(𝒙), 𝑣(𝒙) is the mean and variance of VGP classifier posterior prediction at data point 𝒙 with
composition 𝑥𝑐 , temperature 𝑥T , and phase information 𝑥p . This acquisition is designed guide the agent
to explore all the possible phase transitions region before signaling a termination.

8

6. Database of Gibbs energy functions of pure Sn and Bi
The database of Gibbs energy function of pure Sn and Bi is adapted from Scientific Group Thermodata
Europe (SGTE) data(33). Here is each of the function we used:
(298.15 K < T < 505.07 K)
GHSERSN = − 5855.135 + 65.443315 𝑇 − 15.961 𝑇ln(𝑇) − 0.0188702 𝑇 2 + 3.121167 10−6 𝑇 3
− 61960 𝑇 −1
𝑜 𝐺 𝑏𝑐𝑡 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERSN
𝑆𝑛
𝑆𝑛
𝑜 𝐺 𝑟ℎ𝑜 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERSN + 2035
𝑆𝑛
𝑆𝑛
𝑜 𝐺 𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERSN + 7103.092 – 14.087767𝑇 + 1.47031 10−18 𝑇 7
𝑆𝑛
𝑆𝑛
(505.07 K < T < 800 K)
GHSERSN = + 2524.724 + 4.005269 T − 8.2590486 Tln(𝑇) − 0.016814429 𝑇 2
+ 2.623131 10−6 𝑇 3 − 1081244 𝑇 −1 − 1.2307 1025 𝑇 −9
𝑜 𝐺 𝑏𝑐𝑡 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERSN
𝑆𝑛
𝑆𝑛
𝑜 𝐺 𝑟ℎ𝑜 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERSN + 2035
𝑆𝑛
𝑆𝑛
𝑜 𝐺 𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERSN + 6971.586 – 13.814383T + 1.23071025 𝑇 −9
𝑆𝑛
𝑆𝑛
(298.15 K < T < 544.55 K)
GHSERBI = − 7817.776 + 128.418925 𝑇 − 28.4096529 𝑇ln(𝑇) + 0.012338888 𝑇 2
− 8.381598 10−6 𝑇 3
𝑜 𝐺 𝑟ℎ𝑜 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERBI
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑖
𝑜 𝐺 𝑏𝑐𝑡 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERBI + 4184.07
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑖
𝑜 𝐺 𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERBI + 11246.066 − 20.63651 𝑇 − 5.955 10−19 𝑇 7
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑖
(544.55 K < T < 800 K)
GHSERBI = 30208.022 − 393.650351 𝑇 + 51.8556592 𝑇ln(𝑇) − 0.075311163 𝑇 2
+ 1.3499885 10−5 𝑇 3 − 3616168 𝑇 −1 + 1.661 1025 𝑇 −9
𝑆𝐸𝑅
𝑜 𝑟ℎ𝑜
𝐺𝐵𝑖 − 𝐻𝐵𝑖
= GHSERBI
𝑆𝐸𝑅
𝑜 𝑏𝑐𝑡
𝐺𝐵𝑖 − 𝐻𝐵𝑖 = GHSERBI + 4184.07
𝑜 𝐺 𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑 − 𝐻 𝑆𝐸𝑅 = GHSERBI + 11336.26 − 20.810418 𝑇 − 1.661 1025 𝑇 −9
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑖
bct : body-centered tetragonal, rho : rhombohedral

7. Experimental Setup
The Sn-Bi thin-film combinational spread (0.5 μm thick) was fabricated on a 2 in. (50.8 mm) silicon wafer
with a thermal oxide layer (6 μm) by co-sputtering Sn and Bi targets at room temperature for 24 minutes.
The Bi and Sn gun power are 12 W and 33 W, respectively. The base pressure is 1.9 x10-10 Bar (1.4x10-7
Torr). The spread compositions were determined using wavelength dispersive spectroscopy (WDS) with
error of ±1 at. %. The combinatorial spread was cut into smaller pieces with the desired composition range
and sizes. Bruker C2/D8 Discover powder diffractometer with a high-temperature stage was used to
collect diffraction images. The exposure time for each XRD measurement was set to be 5 minutes. The
diffraction image was integrated into the 1D diffraction data with the 2θ range from 25.3 ° to 41.0 ° and

9

a step size of 0.01 °. The high-temperature stage operated in air can raise the sample temperature up to
200 °C. The temperature ramp rate is set to be 10 °C/min. 5 minutes hold time is used to wait for the
sample to equilibrate before taking any XRD measurement.

8. AMASE Live run
8.1 Live run time-lapse video
The video for the AMASE live run is hosted by the BOX platform and is available for download through
this URL (https://umd.box.com/s/qtrdtrjsgffwadh6nxchfmjwyu94acz9).

8.2 Live run phase diagram evolution
Snapshots of phase diagram evolution are shown in Fig. S3.

10

Fig. S3. The evolution of the phase diagram of the thin-film Bi-Sn binary system. First 10 subfigures show
the Thermo-Calc assessed phase diagrams at the end of each AMASE temperature scan. The last graph
shows all phase diagrams overlaid on top of the others. Blue-to-red color coding is used to show gradual
change of temperature from 50 °C to 200 °C (blue to red), respectively.

References
1.
2.

J. Redmon, A. Farhadi, YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement. doi:
10.48550/arxiv.1804.02767 (2018).
J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, A. Farhadi, “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time
Object Detection” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) (IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2016;
11

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.91), pp. 779–788.
L. Liu, J. Cheng, Q. Quan, F. X. Wu, Y. P. Wang, J. Wang, A survey on U-shaped networks
in medical image segmentations. Neurocomputing 409, 244–258 (2020).
T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan, P. Dollár, C. L. Zitnick,
“Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context BT - Computer Vision – ECCV 2014” D.
Fleet, T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, T. Tuytelaars, Eds. (Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2014), pp. 740–755.
N. Bodla, B. Singh, R. Chellappa, L. S. Davis, “Soft-NMS -- Improving Object Detection
With One Line of Code” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV) (2017).
D. Zagorac, H. Müller, S. Ruehl, J. Zagorac, S. Rehme, Recent developments in the
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database: theoretical crystal structure data and related
features. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 52, 918–925 (2019).
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image
Segmentation. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect.
Notes Bioinformatics) 9351, 234–241 (2015).
A. A. Coelho, TOPAS and TOPAS-Academic: an optimization program integrating
computer algebra and crystallographic objects written in C++. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 51,
210–218 (2018).
F. Oviedo, Z. Ren, S. Sun, C. Settens, Z. Liu, N. T. P. Hartono, S. Ramasamy, B. L. DeCost, S.
I. P. Tian, G. Romano, A. Gilad Kusne, T. Buonassisi, Fast and interpretable classification
of small X-ray diffraction datasets using data augmentation and deep neural networks.
npj Comput. Mater. 2019 51 5, 1–9 (2019).
W. B. Park, J. Chung, J. Jung, K. Sohn, S. P. Singh, M. Pyo, N. Shin, K. S. Sohn, Classification
of crystal structure using a convolutional neural network. IUCrJ 4, 486–494 (2017).
P. M. Maffettone, L. Banko, P. Cui, Y. Lysogorskiy, M. A. Little, D. Olds, A. Ludwig, A. I.
Cooper, Crystallography companion agent for high-throughput materials discovery. Nat.
Comput. Sci. 2021 14 1, 290–297 (2021).
V. Stanev, V. V. Vesselinov, A. G. Kusne, G. Antoszewski, I. Takeuchi, B. S. Alexandrov,
Unsupervised phase mapping of X-ray diffraction data by nonnegative matrix
factorization integrated with custom clustering. npj Comput. Mater. 2018 41 4, 1–10
(2018).
D. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Ament, W. Zhao, D. Guevarra, L. Zhou, B. Selman, R. B. van Dover, J. M.
Gregoire, C. P. Gomes, Automating crystal-structure phase mapping by combining deep
learning with constraint reasoning. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2021 39 3, 812–822 (2021).
W. H. Hwang, C. H. Jeong, D. H. Hwang, Y. C. Jo, Automatic Detection of Arrhythmias
Using a YOLO-Based Network with Long-Duration ECG Signals. Eng. Proc. 2020, Vol. 2,
Page 84 2, 84 (2020).
S. J. Pan, Q. Yang, A Survey on Transfer Learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 22, 1345–
1359 (2010).
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P.
Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher,
M. Perrot, E. Duchesnay, Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res.
12, 2825–2830 (2011).
12

17.

18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.
31.

32.
33.

M. Newville, T. Stensitzki, D. B. Allen, A. Ingargiola, LMFIT: Non-Linear Least-Square
Minimization and Curve-Fitting for Python. Zenodo (2015).
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11813.
M. C. Rowe, B. J. Brewer, AMORPH: A statistical program for characterizing amorphous
materials by X-ray diffraction. Comput. Geosci. 120, 21–31 (2018).
C. M. Fancher, Z. Han, I. Levin, K. Page, B. J. Reich, R. C. Smith, A. G. Wilson, J. L. Jones,
Use of Bayesian Inference in Crystallographic Structure Refinement via Full Diffraction
Profile Analysis. Sci. Reports 2016 61 6, 1–12 (2016).
J.-O. Andersson, T. Helander, L. Höglund, P. Shi, B. Sundman, Thermo-Calc & DICTRA,
computational tools for materials science. Calphad 26, 273–312 (2002).
H. Ohtani, K. Ishida, A thermodynamic study of the phase equilibria in the Bi-Sn-Sb
system. J. Electron. Mater. 1994 238 23, 747–755 (1994).
S. W. Yoon, H. M. Lee, A thermodynamic study of phase equilibria in the Sn-Bi-Pb solder
system. Calphad 22, 167–178 (1998).
B.-J. Lee, C.-S. Oh, J.-H. Shim, Thermodynamic assessments of the Sn-In and Sn-Bi binary
systems. J. Electron. Mater. 25, 983–991 (1996).
H. Ohtani, K. Ishida, A thermodynamic study of the phase equilibria in the Bi-Sn-Sb
system. J. Electron. Mater. 23, 747–755 (1994).
B. Sundman, H. L. Lukas, and S. G. Fries, Computational thermodynamics: the Calphad
method. Cambridge Cambridge Univ. Press (2007).
E. A. Guggenheim, The theoretical basis of Raoult’s law. Trans. Faraday Soc. 33, 151–156
(1936).
O. Redlich, A. T. Kister, Algebraic Representation of Thermodynamic Properties and the
Classification of Solutions. Ind. Eng. Chem. 40, 345–348 (1948).
J. Hensman, N. Fusi, N. D. Lawrence, “Gaussian Processes for Big Data” in Proceedings of
the Twenty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (AUAI Press,
Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2013)UAI’13, pp. 282–290.
M. T. B. T.-P. of the T. I. C. on A. I. and Statistics, Variational Learning of Inducing
Variables in Sparse Gaussian Processes. PMLR.
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v5/titsias09a/titsias09a.pdf.
M. Opper, C. Archambeau, The Variational Gaussian Approximation Revisited. Neural
Comput. 21, 786–792 (2009).
A. G. de G. Matthews, M. van der Wilk, T. Nickson, K. Fujii, A. Boukouvalas, P. LeónVillagrá, Z. Ghahramani, J. Hensman, GPflow: A Gaussian Process Library using
TensorFlow. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 18, 1–6 (2017).
C. E. Rasmussen, C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning. The MIT
Press (2005). https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/3206.001.0001.
A. T. Dinsdale, SGTE DATA FOR PURE ELEMENTS. CALPHAD 15, 317–425 (1991).

13

