NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

N OVEL S EEK: When Agent Becomes the Scientist – Building
Closed-Loop System from Hypothesis to Verification
NovelSeek Team, Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

arXiv:2505.16938v1 [cs.AI] 22 May 2025

https://alpha-innovator.github.io/NovelSeek-project-page
https://github.com/Alpha-Innovator/NovelSeek
https://huggingface.co/U4R/NovelSeek

Reaction Yield Prediction

Time Series Forecasting

Transcription Prediction

Molecular Dynamics
Aspirin

Malonaldehyde

Naphthalene

Salicylic

Ethanol

Toluene

Power Flow Estimation

Enhancer Activity Prediction

Uracil

chemical property

prediction
Energy
Force

Capability

Support AI4Science Tasks

Capability

Start Auto-Research From an Idea !
Auto Experiment

Human-Interaction

Auto Idea-Gen

Visualize Results

Support AI Tasks
3D Classification

MLLM Finetuning

Autonomous Driving

Question:
AB is a diameter, AC=8
inches, and BC=15 inches.
Find the radius of the
circle.

Answer:
AB² = 8² + 15² = 64 + 225 = 289. AB = √289
= 17 inches. radius = AB/2 = 17/2 = 8.5 inches.

Semantic Segmentation

Sentiment Classification
of the most highly-praised
disappointments i
,like life , is n't much fun
without the highs and lows

Image Classification
Cat

Dog

Bear

Figure 1: N OVEL S EEK can support 12 types of scientific research tasks ranging from the AI
field to the science field, including reaction yield prediction, molecular dynamics, power
flow estimation, time series forecasting, transcription prediction, enhancer activity prediction, sentiment classification, 2D image classification, 3D point classification, 2D semantic
segmentation, 3D autonomous driving, large vision-language model fine-tuning.
1

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is accelerating the transformation of scientific
research paradigms, not only enhancing research efficiency but also driving
innovation. We introduce N OVEL S EEK, a unified closed-loop multi-agent
framework to conduct Autonomous Scientific Research (ASR) across various scientific research fields, enabling researchers to tackle complicated
problems in these fields with unprecedented speed and precision. N OVEL S EEK highlights three key advantages: 1) Scalability: N OVEL S EEK has
demonstrated its versatility across 12 scientific research tasks, capable of
generating innovative ideas to enhance the performance of baseline code. 2)
Interactivity: N OVEL S EEK provides an interface for human expert feedback
and multi-agent interaction in automated end-to-end processes, allowing
for the seamless integration of domain expert knowledge. 3) Efficiency:
N OVEL S EEK has achieved promising performance gains in several scientific fields with significantly less time cost compared to human efforts. For
instance, in reaction yield prediction, it increased from 27.6% to 35.4% in
just 12 hours; in enhancer activity prediction, accuracy rose from 0.52 to
0.79 with only 4 hours of processing; and in 2D semantic segmentation,
precision advanced from 78.8% to 81.0% in a mere 30 hours.

1

Introduction

Autonomous Scientific Discovery (ASD) refers to the use of Large Language Models
(LLMs) (Yang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Guo et al., 2025) and robotics
to independently perform scientific research without direct human intervention (Yuan et al.,
2025; Yan et al., 2025; Gottweis et al., 2025; Yamada et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2024). This approach
holds transformative potential for accelerating the pace of discovery across various scientific
domains. By automating tasks such as data analysis, hypothesis generation, experiment
design, and result interpretation, automated systems (Yuan et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2024) can
efficiently process vast amounts of information and uncover patterns or insights that may
be difficult for human researchers to detect.
ASR, while promising, faces significant challenges in generating effective and novel proposals, as well as achieving closed-loop feedback for the experimental validation of these
proposals:
• First, generating proposals that are both effective and novel is a complicated task.
Autonomous systems must identify research gaps and generate hypotheses that are
not only innovative but also scientifically valid. This requires balancing creativity
and rigor, which is difficult for AI models that rely on existing data and patterns.
Additionally, ensuring the novelty of proposals often demands a deep understanding of the broader scientific context, which can be challenging for models limited
by the quality and scope of their training data.
• Second, implementing closed-loop feedback for end-to-end experimental validation
is another major hurdle. Autonomous systems need to design experiments, execute
them, analyze results, and iteratively refine their hypotheses in a seamless loop.
This requires integration across multiple domains, such as robotics for experiment
execution and advanced analytics for result interpretation. Furthermore, real-world
experiments often come with unexpected variables and noise, making it challenging
for autonomous systems to adapt and learn effectively. Achieving a truly closedloop system demands robust coordination, adaptability, and the ability to handle
uncertainty, which remain technical and conceptual barriers.
To further facilitate the advancement of ASR, we propose the N OVEL S EEK, an end-to-end
auto-research pipeline, which covers four main modules: self-evolving idea generation,
human-interactive feedback, idea-to-methodology construction, and multi-round experiment planning and execution. With the help of the Self-Evolving Human-interactive Idea
2

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Generation and Idea-to-Methodology Construction, N OVEL S EEK can transform a rough proposal into a detailed and easily implementable method, which further increases the success
rate of code implementation process and enhances the efficiency of closed-loop experiments.
Besides, by leveraging multi-round experiment planning and execution, N OVEL S EEK is
capable of designing experimental plans and decomposing the experimental process according to the N OVEL S EEK-proposed modules, thereby validating the effectiveness of each
N OVEL S EEK-generated module through experimentation.
As shown in Fig. 1, N OVEL S EEK has been validated across 12 scientific research tasks, and
we are excited to see that the experimental results demonstrate the significant value of
N OVEL S EEK in the entire process from hypothesis generation to experimental validation.
For instance, in the Reaction Yield Prediction task, the baseline model only achieved a
performance of 24.2% ± 4.2, while our model improved it to 34.8% ± 1.1 in just 12 hours. In
contrast, human researchers typically require several months to achieve a similar level of
performance improvement. Another example of performance improvement is the Enhancer
Activity Prediction task. The baseline model, DeepSTARR, achieved a result of 0.52. By
utilizing N OVEL S EEK to search relevant domain literature, automatically generate code,
and conduct validation, the performance can be improved to 0.79, representing a promising
enhancement. In addition, N OVEL S EEK also supports complex project-level modifications
and debugging, which consist of multiple code files. These results clearly indicate that
N OVEL S EEK can autonomously generate ideas and design algorithms, effectively reducing
the dependence on human effort in scientific research. To facilitate reproducibility, we
have open-sourced both the baselines and the codes generated by N OVEL S EEK used in all
involved scientific research tasks at https://github.com/Alpha-Innovator/NovelSeek.
Furthermore, the contributions of this paper are summarized below:
• Unified Multi-agent Framework for Diverse Scientific Research Tasks: We present
N OVEL S EEK, a unified closed-loop scientific research framework that can automate
the entire research cycle, including idea generation, idea-to-methodology transformation, experiment execution, and result feedback. This unified framework can be
directly applied to various scientific research scenarios and fields.
• Interactive Interfaces for Enhanced Cooperative Research: N OVEL S EEK offers
interactive interfaces for human-machine collaboration within the idea generation
module and across the entire system. By selecting collaboration modes, such as
leveraging AI or human experts, it provides evaluations of idea generation effectiveness and facilitates the assessment, reflection, and documentation of experimental
results.
• Comprehensive Experimental Validation and Human Studies: We conducted
extensive human studies centered around N OVEL S EEK, including inviting domain
experts to evaluate and score the novelty of ideas generated by N OVEL S EEK, and
comparing the research efficiency between human researchers and N OVEL S EEK.
These experiments and human studies are crucial for gaining insights into the capabilities of multi-agent systems in conducting scientific research tasks in open-ended
environments. We observed many promising phenomena, while also identifying
certain technical modules that require improvement.

2

N OVEL S EEK

As a unified closed-loop multi-agent framework for ASR, N OVEL S EEK is designed to
facilitate innovative research across diverse scientific domains, as illustrated in Fig. 2. It incorporates three primary capabilities: self-evolving idea generation with human-interactive
feedback (Sec. 2.1), comprehensive idea-to-methodology construction (Sec. 2.2), and multiround automated experiment execution (Sec. 2.3). Each capability is realized through the
collaboration of specialized agents, allowing for seamless integration of different processes
to enhance scientific discoveries.
3

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

NovelSeek
Self-evolving Idea Generation with Human-interactive Feedback
Human-interactive
Feedback

Scientific Research Tasks

…

Workflow
Planning

Chemistry Biology CV&NLP

Memory
Management

Orchestration Agent

Idea-to-Methodology
Ideas

…

Idea Content

Literature
Deep Research

Idea Generation

Relavance Search

Idea Evolution

Survey Agent

Domain
Knowledge

Code
File Structure
Repo-Level File-Level

Literature

Proposing a hierarchical
saliency-guided attention
framework for 3D object
detection in point
clouds

Functions

Code Review Agent

Method Development
Agent
Method

Idea Innovation Agent
Self-Evolution

It contains three key components: Saliency-Guided Pruner
(SGP) : Prunes irrelevant and redundant features based on
learned spatial saliency scores. Global Hierarchical Attention
(GHA) : Aggregates spatial features by hierarchically
combining local and global cues …

Critiques

Critique/Scoring

Context
Memory

Idea Content

Refinement

Literature

Refined Method
Saliency-Guided Pruner (SGP):
\\[ S[h, w, l] = A(\\textbf{W}_s \\cdot f_{hwl} + b_s), \\]\n
\\[ V'[h, w, l] = \\begin{cases} \n f_{hwl}, & \\text{if } S[h, w,
l] \\geq \\tau(~\\text{mean} + k\\sigma~) \\\\\n 0, &
\\text{otherwise.}; Global Hierarchical Attention (GHA):
\\textbf{F}_{\\text{out}} = \\alpha \\cdot
\\textbf{F}_{\\text{local}} + (1 - \\alpha) ...

Group Ranking

Assessment Agent

Evolutionary Experimental Planning and Execution
Baseline Code

Method Details
# Description

AdaptSaliencyNet refines the approach to
3D object detection by…

# Statement

AdaptSaliencyNet introduces
innovations that advance …

# Algorism

two

**Input:** RGB image $X$.
**Output:** 3D Bouding Box $\mathbf{F}$.
1. **Semantic Feature Stream:**
- Extract multi-scale semantic features:
$S = f_s(X; W_s)$.

key

|-- launcher.sh
|-- pcdet
| |-- datasets
| | |-- augmentor
| | |-- dataset.py
| | |-- once
| |-- models
| | |-- backbones_3d
| | |-- dense_heads
| | |-- detectors
| |-- utils
| | |-- box_utils.py
| | |-- common_utils.py

Next Plan Step

Experimental Plan

AutoDebug

Coding Agent
Openhands

Aider

...

…

Run Success
# Results: …
# Training Logs

New Code

Error Tracback

|-- launcher.sh
| |-- models
| | |-- backbones_3d ++-| | |-- dense_heads +++| | |-- detectors +++----

# File ”xxx.py“, line xxx, in
__init__nn.Conv2d( in_chann
els,…
# RuntimeError:Boolean
value of Tensor with more
than one value is ambiguous

Server

…

Next Debug

Figure 2: N OVEL S EEK covers three main capabilities: 1) Self-evolving Idea Generation with
Human-interactive Feedback, 2) Idea-to-Methodology Construction, and 3) Evolutionary
Experimental Planning and Execution.
2.1

Self-Evolving Idea Generation with Human-interactive Feedback

The self-evolving idea generation capability is central to N OVEL S EEK, enabling the framework to autonomously generate and refine innovative research ideas. This process involves
several specialized agents, each contributing to different stages of idea development and
refinement.
Survey Agent. The Survey Agent is designed to meet the diverse needs of various
scientific research tasks by adaptively aligning with user-specified requirements and the
necessary depth of detail for exploring existing methodologies. This adaptability is crucial
for effectively generating new ideas across different research contexts, and the primary
responsibility of the Survey Agent is to search for scientific papers, offering two distinct
modes to address the varying needs for depth and breadth in literature research during the
scientific discovery process: 1) the literature review mode and 2) the deep research mode.
In the literature review mode, the Survey Agent deconstructs the research task into multiple
keyword combinations, enabling a broad search across various academic databases. It
collects scientific literature from these sources and evaluates the relevance of each document
by analyzing abstracts in relation to the task at hand. Denote the keyword generation
process by the function P : T → K, where T represents the descriptions of research tasks
and K is the set of generated keyword combinations. The relevance evaluation of each
document can be represented by the function:
R : L abs × T → [0, 1],

(1)

where L abs is the abstract of retrieved literature L, and R(r, t) measures the relevance
of literature l to the task t as a floating-point score between 0 and 1, with higher scores
indicating greater relevance.
4

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

In the deep research mode, following the initial literature survey, the Survey Agent downloads and thoroughly examines the full texts of relevant scientific papers. This deeper
analysis allows it to generate new keyword combinations, facilitating further rounds of
literature exploration. The process of generating new keywords can be denoted by the
function:
P : L → K′ ,
(2)
′
where K is the expanded set of keyword combinations generated from the detailed analysis
of full texts.
By dynamically adjusting its search strategies based on the context of the research stage,
the Survey Agent ensures a comprehensive and nuanced understanding of the research
landscape. This capability not only supports the generation of innovative ideas but also
ensures that the N OVEL S EEK framework remains at the cutting edge of scientific discovery.
Code Review Agent. The Code Review Agent is crucial for understanding baseline
codes for different research tasks, serving as a foundation for innovation by identifying improvements and developing new methodologies. It provides detailed analyses
of code structures, dependencies, and functionalities, enabling N OVEL S EEK to fully comprehend existing code-bases and identify potential enhancements to advance research
objectives. Moreover, the agent’s ability to document and summarize complex code-bases
ensures efficient navigation and utilization of existing methods. The agent manages two
scenarios: 1) reviewing user-provided code or 2) searching for relevant code-bases. For
user-uploaded code, it conducts a comprehensive review of the structure, logic, and functionality. Alternatively, in the absence of user-uploaded code, it searches public repositories
like GitHub to find relevant code-bases, performing thorough analyses at both the repository
and file levels to understand inter-dependencies and assess logic, efficiency, and correctness.
Furthermore, the agent employs static code analysis using Python’s ‘ast‘ module to parse
and understand code structure without execution, while the LLM generates human-readable
descriptions and summaries, transforming technical details into structured documentation.
By using parallel processing with Python’s ‘multiprocessing‘ module, the agent enhances
efficiency and scalability for large code-bases. Overall, the Code Review Agent offers detailed documentation that deepens the understanding of code repositories and supports
innovation in scientific research.
Idea Innovation Agent. The Idea Innovation Agent is an integral part of N OVEL S EEK,
designed to enhance the creative and iterative processes of scientific research. This agent
plays a crucial role by automating the generation and evolution of ideas, thereby addressing
the limitations of traditional research works (Yuan et al., 2025; Yamada et al., 2025; Lu et al.,
2024), which often rely on time-consuming manual efforts and are constrained by human
cognitive biases. The agent’s dual responsibilities, idea generation and idea evolution, are
specifically designed to address the diverse needs of various scientific disciplines.
In the context of idea generation, the agent utilizes a general LLM configured with a higher
temperature setting. This configuration encourages the generation of more diverse and
creative outputs. This enables the agent to identify patterns and insights that might be
overlooked in traditional research, generating novel hypotheses and strategies based on
task definitions, baseline methods, and current scientific knowledge. The process can be
represented by the function:
G : (T , B , L) → I ,
(3)
where B denotes analysis of baseline methods and I is the set of generated ideas. The LLM
facilitates the exploration of a broader spectrum of possibilities, accelerating the pace of
discovery and innovation by leveraging its comprehensive understanding of language and
context.
Idea evolution leverages the capabilities of an LLM to improve existing ideas. The process
involves analyzing the content of these ideas, incorporating reflections, which include
evaluations of novelty, feasibility, and scientific validity, and integrating insights from
related literature. This approach enables the generation of refined and innovative ideas by
addressing the inherent limitations of initial concepts. The process can be represented by
the same function:
G : (I , C , L) → I ′ ,
(4)
5

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

where I is the initial set of ideas, C denotes the critique, and I ′ is the set of evolved ideas.
Overall, the Idea Innovation Agent enhances scientific ideas into viable and creative solutions by synthesizing and contextualizing information. It critically examines current
ideas and employs feedback loops with human experts and other N OVEL S EEK agents for
continuous improvement. This iterative process balances novelty, feasibility, and ethical
considerations, producing impactful and well-rounded ideas.
Assessment Agent. The Assessment Agent is a vital component of N OVEL S EEK, designed
to ensure the quality and viability of generated ideas through a rigorous evaluation process. In the rapidly evolving landscape of scientific research, the systematic and objective
assessment of ideas is essential. Traditional methods often suffer from subjectivity and
lack comprehensive coverage of all relevant dimensions, which can lead to promising ideas
being overlooked(Qiu et al., 2025; Si et al., 2024). Therefore, the Assessment Agent addresses
these challenges by providing a structured and multidimensional evaluation process, which
in turn enhances the reliability and effectiveness of idea selection.
The primary responsibility of the Assessment Agent is to critically evaluate ideas using multidimensional scoring. Each idea is analyzed across key dimensions: coherence, credibility,
verifiability, novelty, and alignment. Coherence checks the logical consistency and structure
of the idea, while credibility assesses its trustworthiness based on existing knowledge.
Verifiability examines the idea’s testability through empirical methods. Novelty measures
originality, and alignment ensures consistency with research goals.
Moreover, for each dimension, the Assessment Agent provides a detailed evaluation narrative to explain its reasoning. It assigns scores from 0 to 10, which are combined using
a weighted summation to produce an overall score for each idea, aiding in the ranking
process. By utilizing advanced LLMs, the agent can accurately process and evaluate complex
scientific concepts. This capability allows a comprehensive assessment that includes both
qualitative and quantitative aspects, ensuring the evaluation is thorough and well-rounded.
Furthermore, the Assessment Agent possesses the ability to ensure diversity among topranked ideas. This capability prevents high-scoring ideas from being overly similar or
derived from the same original concept. By promoting a varied pool of ideas, the agent
encourages the exploration of diverse pathways in the research process. This is crucial
for maintaining a balance between innovation and practicality, ensuring that the most
promising ideas are both high-quality and distinct from each other.
In summary, by employing LLMs for multidimensional scoring and leveraging its ability to
promote diversity among ideas, the Assessment Agent ensures that only the most viable and
innovative concepts are selected for further development. This process not only enhances
the efficiency of the research cycle but also fosters a more dynamic and diverse research
environment.
Human-interactive Feedback. In the context of multi-agent systems, human-interactive
feedback is a crucial component for effectively managing and solving complex tasks. This
integration of human insights enables agents to navigate dynamic environments more
effectively, aligning their outputs with complex user requirements and ensuring practical
applicability.
The human-interactive feedback mechanism of N OVEL S EEK is categorized into two primary types:
1) feedback directly provided by humans and
2) feedback automatically generated by agent.
Human-provided feedback can address one or multiple ideas, offering insights and critiques that lead to further refinement
and adjustment of these ideas based on the feedback received. This iterative process
facilitates the continuous improvement of ideas, ensuring they are honed to meet specific
objectives and challenges.
For example, in a scenario involving medical image segmentation, an LLM multi-agent
system might initially propose a broad idea focused on developing more advanced segmentation algorithms. However, human feedback can refine this idea by directing attention
specifically to the medical domain. Human experts can provide insights that encourage the

6

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Init Idea 0

Init Idea 1

Init Idea 2

Adding a graph-derived reaction descriptor
as
a
precondition
for
attention
scores in the transformer architecture can
bias computations toward chemically
relevant substructures.

Using a modality alignment objective with a
contrastive learning loss can fuse textual
SMILES embeddings with molecular graphbased embeddings extracted via a GNN to
improve yield prediction accuracy.

Introducing cyclic attention mechanisms
specifically designed to focus on circular
dependencies in SMILES-based token
sequences improves the attention to
stereochemistry
and
reaction-specific
quirks crucial for yield prediction.

…

Evolved Idea 0-0

Evolved Idea 0-1

Evolved Idea 0-2

Leveraging graph-derived reaction descriptors
such as bond valence and reaction center
importance to generate attention masks that
selectively modify attention scores for
SMILES tokens associated with chemically
relevant substructures will improve the
model's yield prediction accuracy by steering
the network's focus toward critical chemical
regions during training.

Integrating
graph-derived
reaction
descriptors such as bond valence and reaction
center importance as auxiliary inputs into
transformer attention layers using crossattention mechanisms will enhance the model's
ability to identify and attend to chemically
relevant substructures, thereby improving
yield prediction performance while managing
overfitting risks.

Using graph-derived reaction descriptors such
as bond valence, reaction center importance,
and molecular transformations to compute
graph-aware positional
embeddings for
SMILES tokens will introduce chemical
context within the attention mechanism,
focusing the model on chemically significant
regions and improving the accuracy of yield
predictions.

Evolved Idea 0-0-0

Evolved Idea 0-0-1

Evolved Idea 0-0-2

Integrating
graph-derived
reaction
descriptors,
including
functional
group
importance and reaction center identification,
with SMILES token embeddings via crossmodality attention layers that explicitly
encode stereochemistry and spatial alignment
will improve prediction accuracy by capturing
both local chemical details and global reaction
contexts.

Employing multi-scale cross-modality attention
modules to integrate graph-derived reaction
descriptors and SMILES representations,
while introducing a hierarchical weighting
system to balance local and global reaction
factors, will enhance yield prediction accuracy
by effectively synthesizing substructurespecific chemical insights and reaction
context.

Combining graph neural network (GNN)derived reaction descriptors, such as
functional group and reaction center features,
with SMILES token embeddings through a
cross-attention bridging module focusing on
semantic alignment of representations will
improve prediction accuracy by creating a
unified chemical feature space that captures
substructural
and
contextual
reaction
elements.

…

…

Evolved Idea 0-0-1-0

Evolved Idea 0-0-1-1

Evolved Idea 0-0-1-2

Integrating
graph-derived
reaction
descriptors with SMILES representations
using
a
cross-token
graph-attention
mechanism,
combined
with
symmetric
hierarchical
weighting
to
balance
substructure-specific and reaction-context
features, will improve yield prediction by
capturing
stereochemical
and
spatial
information alongside reaction semantics,
while leveraging adaptive dropout.

A dual-encoder framework combining a
SMILES-based LLaMA encoder with a graph
convolutional network (GCN) for reaction
descriptors, fused via modality-specific
attention layers and a residual weighting
mechanism to balance local functional group
transformations and global reaction conditions,
will enhance yield prediction accuracy by
incorporating both structural and contextdependent information.

Enhancing
SMILES
and
graph-derived
reaction descriptor integration using a hybrid
graph-transformer network that incorporates
hierarchical token-attention mechanisms at
the molecular substructure and reactioncondition levels, combined with adaptive layer
freezing for fine-tuning, will improve chemical
yield prediction by leveraging both 1D and 2D
molecular representations while minimizing
overfitting.

Figure 3: N OVEL S EEK Self-evolutionary path of ideas for reaction yield prediction task.

development of adaptive solutions tailored to the unique challenges of medical imaging,
such as handling diverse tissue types and ensuring high accuracy in identifying critical
structures. This targeted feedback not only sharpens the focus of the idea but also ensures
it aligns with the specific needs and priorities of medical research, enhancing its practical
applicability and impact.
Orchestration Agent. The Orchestration Agent coordinates all other agents within the system, facilitating collaboration by synchronizing tasks and managing data flow. This ensures
the process remains efficient, coherent, and aligned with research objectives, allowing the
framework to function as an effective research tool.
Central to the Orchestration Agent’s role is designing and managing workflows among
agents like the Survey Agent, Code Review Agent, Idea Innovation Agent, and Assessment
Agent. It also oversees the timing of human feedback, especially for high-scoring ideas.
This requires understanding each agent’s capabilities and their interactions to optimize task
execution and completion. For example, the Survey Agent conducts adaptive literature
exploration, providing insights that the Idea Innovation Agent uses to generate novel hypotheses. The Orchestration Agent ensures these findings are communicated effectively.
Similarly, it synchronizes the Code Review Agent’s analyses to enhance idea evaluation
and development. Furthermore, the Orchestration Agent manages the Assessment Agent’s
evaluation process, ensuring timely and relevant outputs. This helps guide the development of diverse top ideas. Additionally, it determines optimal points for human feedback,
integrating expert insights after identifying high-scoring ideas to refine and adapt them,
aligning outputs with user requirements.
In summary, as illustrated in Fig. 3, by managing multi-agent collaboration and integrating
human feedback, the Orchestration Agent enables N OVEL S EEK to operate as a cohesive and
innovative research tool, driving scientific discovery forward.
2.2

Comprehensive Idea-to-Methodology Construction

The idea-to-methodology construction process systematically bridges the gap between
concise research ideas and concrete, implementable methodologies, ensuring that the AI7

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

generated ideas could be realized and their validity verified. This process is orchestrated
by the Methodology Development Agent, which collaborates closely with other agents
and integrates both automated processes and human-interactive feedback loops to ensure
that methodological development is rigorous, traceable, and practically relevant. Specifically, to develop a comprehensive method corresponding to the concise research idea, the
Method Development Agent possesses two core capabilities: 1) Methodology Initialization:
which involves constructing the basic structure and content of a method by integrating the idea with baseline codes and the methodology content of relevant literature;
2) Methodology Refinement: which iteratively enhances the basic method structure for
the purpose of rigor and completeness, ensuring a more detailed and robust methodology.
2.2.1

Methodology Initialization

To convert concise research ideas into detailed methodological frameworks, the Method
Development Agent uses its Methodology Initialization capability. The process begins by
extracting core objectives and hypotheses from research ideas, identifying key variables,
and understanding their interrelationships to construct a coherent framework. The agent
uses multiple resources: task descriptions T provide context and constraints; baseline
implementations B offer adaptable methods; and relevant literature L integrates existing
knowledge and ensures that the framework aligns with current research.
By formalizing mechanisms that require empirical investigation, the agent details processes
and conditions for conducting research and specifies methods for data collection and
analysis. The outcome is a methodological framework that is both theoretically sound and
practically executable. The transformation function is represented as:
T : I × T × B × L → M,

(5)

where I denotes research ideas, T includes task descriptions, B represents baseline methods,
L is the literature corpus, and M is the resulting methodological framework. Overall,
through Methodology Initialization, the Method Development Agent effectively turns initial
ideas into detailed, actionable methods, ready for further refinement.
2.2.2

Methodology Refinement

After the initialization, the Methodology Development Agent leverages its refinement
capability to critically evaluate and iteratively improve the methodological framework.
The agent conducts a comprehensive analysis of the initial methodology M, incorporating
structured critiques C , which include both automated assessments and expert human
feedback. Additionally, it synthesizes insights from the latest scientific literature L. The
refinement process is formally defined as:
R : M × C × L → M′ ,

(6)

where M represents the initial methodology, C denotes the critique space, potentially
including human feedback and automated assessments, L is the literature corpus, and M′
is the refined methodological framework.
During both initialization and refinement, the Methodology Development Agent collaborates closely with other agents, such as the Assessment Agent for multidimensional evaluation and the Orchestration Agent for workflow coordination. This collaboration ensures
that each methodological step benefits from comprehensive feedback and current domain
knowledge. The integrated, multi-agent approach guarantees that the transformation from
idea to methodology is systematic and adaptable, supporting the continuous evolution and
optimization of scientific research within the N OVEL S EEK framework.
2.3
2.3.1

Evolutionary Experimental Planning and Execution
Exception-Guided Debugging Framework

Converting theoretical concepts into functional code is challenging. To this end, we developed an exception-guided debugging framework that systematically converts abstract
8

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

methodological text descriptions into executable implementation codes. This framework
operates by systematically capturing runtime exceptions during execution attempts, analyzing error contexts, and formulating targeted fixes through reasoning of the large language
model.
Our coder module employs a dual-strategy approach according to the complexity of given
baseline code. For single-file or limited-scope implementation tasks, we use the Aider coding
assistant (Gauthier & Contributors, 2023), which facilitates localized code modifications with
minimal overhead. For complex repository-level codes requiring comprehensive structural
understanding across different functions, we deploy OpenHands framework (Wang et al.,
2024b), which enables thorough codebase analysis and coordinated multi-file modifications
while maintaining the integrity of the overall code architecture.
Once the initial code implementation is completed, the framework transitions to a systematic
debugging phase to ensure functionality and robustness. The debugging process follows
a systematic cycle: (1) execution attempt, (2) exception capture and traceback analysis,
(3) contextual code structure understanding, (4) debugging strategy formulation, and (5)
targeted implementation. This cycle continues iteratively until successful execution or
reaching a predefined iteration threshold.
2.3.2

Experimental Planning and Adaptive Evolution

After establishing basic functionality through debugging, we transition to implementation
planning focused on identifying critical structures and integration points. Our planning
process first determines which core modules require modification, then develops a step-bystep implementation strategy with clear priorities and dependencies.
Implementation planning operates at multiple abstraction levels: architectural modifications for methodological alignment, algorithmic transformations for core functionality,
and optimization adjustments for performance characteristics. This approach aims to provide structure when implementing methodological improvements across interconnected
components in AI systems, which helps guide development efforts.
Rather than employing a single-pass implementation strategy, we designed an adaptive
evolution approach for our implementation process. This approach involves structured
iterations where each implementation attempt is followed by performance assessment and
potential refinement. We maintain records of implementation decisions across iterations,
which helps track changes and their corresponding effects. This directed adaptation process
enables the gradual refinement of complex implementations based on empirical results
rather than theoretical assumptions alone.

3

Experiments

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of N OVEL S EEK in conducting autonomous
research and accelerating scientific discovery. We begin by providing a brief overview of
the selected multi-domain tasks and detailing the experimental implementation in Sec. 3.1.
Subsequently, we present the quantitative results across various tasks in Sec. 3.2 and conduct
an analysis of the different modules within N OVEL S EEK in Sec. 3.3.
3.1

Experimental Setup

3.1.1

Task Description

We select 12 distinct tasks to demonstrate N OVEL S EEK’s capability in conduct Autonomous
Scientific Research (ASR). These tasks span multiple modalities, including science (e.g.,
reaction yield prediction, molecular dynamics), time series (e.g., time series forecasting),
natural language (e.g., sentiment classification), image (e.g., semantic segmentation), and
point cloud (e.g., 3D object detection), which cover both discriminative and generative
tasks. We believe that experiments ranging from fundamental tasks to complex multi-modal
9

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

tasks can comprehensively illustrate the effectiveness of N OVEL S EEK. Below, we detail the
datasets, the base code repositories, and the experimental settings for each task.
• Reaction Yield Prediction (AutoRYP). We conduct experiments on the widely-used
Suzuki-Miyaura reaction dataset (Perera et al., 2018), which contains 5,760 reaction
data. Each data point includes structured chemical reaction information, such as
reactants, products, reaction types, reaction conditions (solvent, catalyst, ligand, and
base), functional group, and yield values. We use the LoRA-finetuned LLaMA3-8B
as our baseline, an embedding model that converts chemical reaction texts into
high-dimensional vector representations, which are subsequently fed into a fully
connected prediction network predictor to perform chemical yield prediction.
• Molecular Dynamics (AutoMD). We conduct experiments on the widely-used
MD17 dataset (Chmiela et al., 2017), which contains energy and force calculation
results for seven small organic molecules: aspirin, ethanol, malonaldehyde, naphthalene, salicylic acid, toluene, and uracil. We use VisNet (Wang et al., 2024d) as our
baseline, an equivariant geometry-enhanced graph neural network that achieves
excellent chemical property prediction.
• Power Flow Estimation (AutoPower). We conduct experiments on the IEEE 39-Bus
dataset (Zimmerman et al., 2010), which is a medium-scale benchmark based on
the New England power system, comprising 39 buses, 10 synchronous generators,
19 load buses and 46 transmission lines, and providing AC power flow snapshots
under a variety of load conditions. We use SenseFlow (Zhao et al., 2024) as our
baseline, a novel physics-informed, self-ensembling power flow estimation model
that has demonstrated state-of-the-art accuracy on standard IEEE test systems
consistently outperforming both traditional state-estimation techniques and recent
data-driven approaches in voltage and power-flow recovery tasks.
• Time Series Forecasting (AutoTSF). We conduct experiments on the ETTh1 dataset,
which is a 1-hour-level subset of the Electricity Transformer Temperature (ETT)
benchmark (Zhou et al., 2021). This dataset comprises two years of hourly multivariate time series, including the target oil temperature and six power-load covariates,
collected from transformer stations in two Chinese counties. We use DLinear (Zeng
et al., 2023) as our baseline, an MLP-based forecasting model that decomposes each
series into trend and seasonality and employs simple linear layers, outperforming
Transformer-based methods on multiple time series benchmarks. We report the
average results of 96, 192, 336, and 720 prediction length.
• Transcription Prediction for Perturbation Response (AutoTPPR). We conduct
experiments on the Perturb-seq dataset (Norman et al., 2019), which contains singlecell gene expression data measuring the transcriptional responses of cells to various
perturbations. We use GEARS (Generative Energy-based Autoencoder for scRNAseq) (Roohani et al., 2024) as our baseline, a framework based on Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) and Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), designed to learn joint
representations of single-cell multi-omics data.
• Enhancer Activity Prediction (AutoEAP). We conduct experiments on the UMISTARR-seq dataset (Arnold et al., 2013), which contains genome-wide, highresolution quantitative activity maps of developmental and housekeeping enhancers in Drosophila S2 cells. We use DeepSTARR (de Almeida et al., 2022) as our
baseline, a deep learning model that excels at quantitatively predicting enhancer
activity from DNA sequences.
• Sentiment Analysis (AutoSenCls). We conduct experiments on the Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST-2) dataset (Socher et al., 2013), a binary sentiment classification
dataset consisting of movie reviews with approximately 67,000 training samples.
We use BERT-base (Devlin et al., 2019) as our baseline, a Transformer-based pretrained language model that has shown excellent performance on various NLP
tasks.
• 2D Image Classification (Auto2DCls). We conduct experiments on the widelyused CIFAR-100 dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), which contains 60,000 32×32
color images in 100 classes, with 500 training images and 100 testing images per
10

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

class. We use Wide Residual Networks (WRN) (Zagoruyko, 2016) as our baseline,
which improves performance by increasing the width rather than the depth of
convolutional networks.
• 3D Point Cloud Classification (Auto3DCls). We conduct experiments on the
ModelNet40 dataset (Wu et al., 2015), which contains 12,311 CAD models across 40
common object categories and is widely used for 3D shape classification tasks. We
use PointNet (Qi et al., 2017) as our baseline, a pioneering deep learning architecture
that directly processes point cloud data.
• 2D Semantic Segmentation (Auto2DSeg). We conduct experiments on the widelyused Pascal VOC 2012 dataset (Everingham et al., 2012), which includes 20
object classes and a background class for semantic segmentation tasks. The
dataset contains 1,464 images for training and 1,449 for validation. We use
DeepLabV3Plus (Chen et al., 2018) as our baseline method, which enhances segmentation performance by employing atrous convolution and a more refined encoderdecoder structure to capture multiscale contextual information effectively.
• 3D Point Cloud Autonomous Driving (AutoPCDet). We conduct experiments on
the widely-used dataset ONCE (Mao et al., 2021) and use CenterPoint (Yin et al.,
2021) as our baseline. Our code is based on OpenPCDet (Team, 2020) and we filter
out all code irrelevant to the baseline model to avoid knowledge leakage.
• Large Vision-Language Model Fine-tuning (AutoVLM).We conduct experiments
on filtered geometry subset of the URSA dataset (Luo et al., 2025), comprising
manually curated multimodal QA pairs and CoT process. Natural images were
excluded, and data were downsampled to control experimental budgets, enabling
training completion within 20 hours on 8 A800 GPUs.We use LLaVA-Onevision (Li
et al., 2024a) as our baseline, a robust multimodal alignment framework using
a simple MLP to align visual encoders with LLMs, forming an effective LMM
with strong scalability on vision-language tasks. We take SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023)
and Qwen2.5-Math-7B-Instruct(Yang et al.) as the visual and language modules,
respectively.
3.1.2

Evaluation Metric

Since our N OVEL S EEK has been validated across a wide range of scientific research fields,
the evaluation metrics used for tasks in each field are not consistent. Therefore, in this part,
we provide a detailed introduction to the evaluation metrics used for each scientific research
task.
• AutoRYP. For Reaction Yield Prediction, we evaluate model performance using the
coefficient of determination (R²), which quantifies the proportion of variance in the
actual reaction yields that is predictable from the model’s predictions.
• AutoMD. Our method is evaluated on the MD17 dataset, a molecular chemical property prediction task. The performance is measured using Force-MAE, representing
the mean absolute error between the true and predicted forces of molecules.
• AutoPower. For Power Flow Estimation, we use Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) on
PQ node to evaluate the estimation performance on IEEE 39-Bus datasets, representing the root mean square error between the true and predicted voltage magnitudes
and phase angles.
• AutoTSF. For Time Series Forecasting, we use Mean Absolute Error (MAE) to evaluate the prediction performance on ETTh1 dataset. The performance is calculated
by taking the average of the four prediction steps of {96, 192, 336, 720}.
• AutoTPPR. For Transcription Prediction for Perturbation Response, we employ
the Top 20 DE MSE as the evaluation metric, calculating the mean squared error
between the predicted and actual expression levels of the top 20 most differentially
expressed genes under each perturbation condition.
• AutoEAP. For Enhancer Activity Prediction, we use Housekeeper Pearson Correlation Coefficient (HK-PCC) as the metric, which quantifies the correlation between
the true enhancer activities and the predicted values.
11

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

• AutoSenCls. We evaluate our method on the SST-2 dataset, which is a binary
sentiment classification task. The performance is measured using accuracy (Acc),
which represents the percentage of correctly classified samples.
• Auto2DCls. For 2D image classification, we conduct experiments on CIFAR-100
dataset, which contains 100 classes. The performance is measured using classification accuracy (Acc), representing the percentage of correctly classified images.
• Auto3DCls. For the task of 3D point cloud classification, we use the widely adopted
ModelNet40 benchmark, which comprises 40 distinct object categories. We report
the Overall Accuracy (OA) as our primary evaluation metric, which calculates the
proportion of correctly classified instances in the entire test set.
• Auto2DSeg. For 2D semantic segmentation, we conduct experiments on the Pascal
VOC 2012 dataset, which includes 20 object classes and a background class. The
performance is measured using the mean Intersection over Union (MIoU), which
quantifies the average overlap between the predicted segmentation and the ground
truth across all classes, providing a comprehensive assessment of the model’s
segmentation accuracy.
• AutoPCD. Following ONCE official evaluation metric, we merge the car, bus and
truck class into a super-class (i.e., vehicle). AP3D is used to evaluate the performance
of the ONCE dataset, we report Mean average precision (mAP) which is the average
of the scores of the three categories.
• AutoVLM. We evaluated our model on the geometry subset of MathVista (Lu et al.,
2023), a widely adopted multimodal mathematical benchmark. Model’s answers to
questions were extracted using GPT-4o and compared against the ground truth to
calculate accuracy.
3.1.3

Implementation Details

In the self-evolving idea generation process, the survey agent, code review agent, generation
agent, self-evolving agent, and orchestration agent are based on GPT-4o (Hurst et al., 2024).
The survey agent searches and reviews 50 papers to provide domain knowledge for the
subsequent idea generation agent, and then the idea generation agent generates 15 ideas.
The self-evolving agent evolves each idea into 3 ideas and then selects the top 5 ideas for
the next evolving process until the maximum number of evolutions (i.e., 4) is reached. In
the idea-to-methodology process, each idea is initialized and refined once by the method
development agent. In the evolutionary experimental planning and execution process. We
use Claude-3.7-Sonnet to generate codes and debug. We set the max debug attempt to
4. The max run number is set to 5 for Aider (Gauthier & Contributors, 2023) and 3 for
OpenHands (Wang et al., 2024c).
3.2

Experimental Results

To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of N OVEL S EEK in accelerating scientific
discovery, we first provide quantitative experimental results as shown in Tab. 1, Tab. 2,
Tab. 3, and Tab. 4. Extensive results demonstrate that N OVEL S EEK excels in the following
aspects:
• Outperforming existing auto-research systems on multiple tasks. We first compare N OVEL S EEK with existing auto-research system (i.e., D OLPHIN (Yuan et al.,
2025)) on single-file tasks. Tab. 1 and Tab. 2 show the max performance and average
performance (i.e., the average performance across experiments with performance
gains) achieved by N OVEL S EEK and D OLPHIN. It can be observed that N OVEL S EEK
consistently improves the performance compared to the baseline and outperforms
D OLPHIN across all tasks including both generative and discriminative tasks. This
suggests that N OVEL S EEK can generate better ideas on each specific domain benefiting from the self-evolving idea generation process and automatically implement
them. For example, in AutoRYP, methods proposed by N OVEL S EEK can largely
12

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Table 1: Performance comparison across six types of scientific research tasks. We conduct
experiments using 10 N OVE S EEK generated ideas for each task.
Tasks
Method

AutoRYP

AutoMD

AutoPower

AutoTSF

AutoTPPR

AutoEAP

R2

Forces-MAE

RMSE

MAE

MSE

HK-PCC

0.4382
0.4627
0.4331

0.197
0.173
0.146

0.52
0.76
0.79

0.4382
0.4346

0.197
0.179
0.170

0.52
0.73
0.77

Max Performance
Baseline
27.6
Dolphin
31.8 (+4.2)
N OVEL S EEK 35.4 (+7.8)

0.158
0.152
0.148

0.00473
0.00455
0.00426

Average Performance
Baseline
27.6
Dolphin
31.3 (+3.7)
N OVEL S EEK 33.5 (+5.9)

0.158
0.155
0.152

0.00473
0.00459
0.00447

Table 2: Performance comparison for six types of scientific research tasks. We conduct
experiments using 10 N OVE S EEK generated ideas for each task, where baseline codes for
Auto2DSeg, AutoPCDet, and AutoVLM are project-level, consisting of multiple code files
with complex call relation between functions. Therefore, the coder in Dolphin (Yuan et al.,
2025) does not support modifying this type of baseline codes.
Tasks
Method

AutoSenCls

Auto2DCls

Auto3DCls

Auto2DSeg

AutoPCDet

AutoVLM

Acc

Top-1 Acc

OA

mIoU

mAP

QA

78.8
81.0 (+2.2)

65.0
65.9 (+0.9)

67.1
67.6 (+0.5)

65.0
65.7 (+0.7)

67.1
67.6 (+0.5)

Max Performance
Baseline
D OLPHIN
N OVEL S EEK

91.0
92.5 (+1.5)
93.5 (+2.5)

81.2
82.0 (+0.8)
83.3 (+2.1)

91.0
93.9 (+2.9)
95.5 (+4.5)

Average Performance
Baseline
D OLPHIN
N OVEL S EEK

91.0
91.8 (+0.8)
92.5 (+1.5)

81.2
81.8 (+0.6)
82.2 (+1.0)

91.0
92.0 (+1.0)
93.4 (+2.4)

78.8
80.1 (+1.3)

outperform those proposed by D OLPHIN (i.e., +3.6 on max performance). We highlight that N OVEL S EEK can achieve SoTA performance on some tasks such as 3D
point cloud classification (i.e., 95.5% overall accuracy without pre-training achieved
by N OVEL S EEK compared to 95.3% overall accuracy with pre-training achieved by
human experts).

Table 3: Experiments statistics across different tasks. Each cell shows the number of ideas
that improved performance, the number of ideas that successfully ran, and the total number
of ideas tested (format: improved / successful / tested). For all the tasks, we conduct
experiments with 10 ideas.
Research Task
Method

AutoRYP

AutoMD

AutoPower

AutoTSF

AutoTPPR

AutoEAP

Dolphin
N OVEL S EEK

2/3/10
4/6/10

2/4/10
4/8/10

2/4/10
5/6/10

0/3/10
3/7/10

2/3/10
5/5/10

2/4/10
8/8/10

13

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Table 4: Experiments statistics across different tasks. Each cell shows the number of ideas
that improved performance, the number of ideas that successfully ran, and the total number
of ideas tested (format: improved / successful / tested). For all the tasks, we conduct
experiments with 10 ideas.
Research Task
Method
Dolphin
N OVEL S EEK

Auto2DCls

Auto3DCls

AutoSenCls

Auto2DSeg

AutoPCDet

AutoVLM

2/4/10
5/7/10

2/5/10
3/6/10

4/7/10
9/9/10

6/9/10

2/5/10

1/5/10

Table 5: Computational and financial cost analysis for all tasks. Training time is measured
using A100 GPU hours, while idea generation and code debugging costs are measured in
USD using gpt-4o and claude-sonnet-3.7 models respectively.
Cost Metric
Training time (A100 hours)
Idea-Gen cost (gpt-4o) ($)
Coder-Debug cost (claude-sonnet-3.7) ($)

AutoRYP

AutoMD

AutoPower

AutoTSF

AutoTPPR

AutoEAP

6.0
0.6
0.7

10.0
0.6
0.5

5.0
0.6
1.0

0.1
0.6
0.4

1.0
0.6
0.9

1.0
0.6
0.6

Besides, Tab. 3 and Tab. 4 report the percentage of experiments with performance
gains and executable experiments out of the total number of experiments. First, results show that even on complex tasks such as AutoPCDet (i.e., 50%) and Auto2DSeg
(i.e., 90%), N OVEL S EEK can still ensure a reasonable execution success rate which is
due to the carefully designed idea-to-methodology process, enabling the coder to
auto-implement based on detailed methodologies. Second, N OVEL S EEK demonstrates a higher performance improvement rate compared to D OLPHIN. This improvement is mainly attributed to the idea-to-methodology feature of N OVEL S EEK,
which enables the concretization of high-level ideas. Additionally, through the
process of multi-round experimental planning and execution, the submodules of
the AI-generated methodology are progressively integrated into the baseline code.
• Covering a wide range of tasks including the scientific research tasks and AI
tasks. Further, N OVEL S EEK exhibits strong generalization capability across a wide
range of tasks, enabling it to handle tasks from the AI domain (e.g., Auto2DSeg) to
the scientific domain (e.g., AutoMD). As shown in Tab. 1 and Tab. 2, N OVEL S EEK
can support 12 different tasks ranging from simple classification tasks to complex
multimodal and cross-disciplinary tasks. This is because the survey agent in N OVEL S EEK can auto-search task-related literature on academic websites such as arXiv
and review the literature to understand each task. Besides, N OVEL S EEK is highly
extensible, as it can support new tasks with just a task description and reference
codes. This capability not only assists AI researchers in automatically updating
algorithms, but also empowers researchers in scientific domains to utilize AI tools
at a lower cost, thereby accelerating the pace of scientific discovery.
• Support repo-level experiments. Most of existing auto-research systems such as
D OLPHIN (Yuan et al., 2025) only support single-file experiments. On more complex
tasks, researchers are required to manually consolidate complex task codes into
a single file, which is highly time-consuming and limits their ability to conduct
experiments on complex tasks. In contrast, N OVEL S EEK can support repo-level
tasks such as AutoPCDet, AutoVLM, AutoTPPR, and so on, and achieve better
performance on these repo-level tasks compared to their baselines. For example, on
Auto2DSeg, N OVEL S EEK pipeline can improve the DeepLabV3Plus baseline (Chen
et al., 2018) from the original 78.80% to 81.0%. This is attributed to the detailed
methodology, code comprehension achieved by the code review agent, and the
auto-exploration ability of the coder agent.
Runtime Statistics. We further provide the runtime statistics of N OVEL S EEK on all 12 tasks
including the training costs (i.e., GPU hours) and monetary costs in the idea generation stage
(including self-evolving idea generation and idea-to-methodology) and code execution and
14

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Table 6: Computational and financial cost analysis for all tasks. Training time is measured
using A100 GPU hours, while idea generation and code debugging costs are measured in
USD using gpt-4o and claude-sonnet-3.7 models respectively.
Cost Metric

Auto2DCls

Auto3DCls

AutoSenCls

Auto2DSeg

AutoPCDet

AutoVLM

2.0
0.6
0.7

0.8
0.6
0.6

0.3
0.6
0.7

30.0
0.6
1.1

9.0
0.6
1.2

192.0
0.6
1.0

Training time (A100 hours)
Idea-Gen cost (gpt-4o) ($)
Coder-Debug cost (claude-sonnet-3.7) ($)

Table 7: To compare the performance of the baseline and N OVEL S EEK-generated code, we
adopted a few-shot training setup for the yield prediction task. Due to the large variance in
experimental results under this setting, we report the outcomes of 5 independent repeated
experiments.
Epoch=300

Repeat=1

Repeat=2

Repeat=3

Repeat=4

Repeat=5

AVG/VAR

Baseline (train-set=60)
GAT (ours, train-set=60)
ADAGT (ours, train-set=60)

20.0
34.7
35.4

26.2
34.8
35.2

27.6
33.9
34.5

26.6
32.7
35.2

20.1
34.2
33.7

24.2±4.2
34.1±1.4
34.8±1.1

Baseline (train-set=100)
GAT (ours, train-set=100)
ADAGT (ours, train-set=100)

38.8
36.9
38.5

30.6
39.1
38.0

34.8
34.4
38.6

39.0
41.4
37.9

34.5
35.0
40.4

35.5±4.9
37.4±4.0
38.7±1.7

debug stage. As shown in Tab. 5 and Tab. 6. As mentioned in Sec. 3.1.3, we select top
5 ideas in each idea generation process and then generate detailed methodology for the
selected ideas. Therefore, we report the average cost of 5 ideas as the idea generation cost. It
can be seen that the idea generation cost of each idea is about $0.6 using GPT-4o which is
cost-efficient. The coder-debug cost denote the cost of each run, for example, if running for
5 times for a single idea as mentioned in Sec. 2.3, we calculate the average cost of 5 runs.
It can be seen from the table that the coder-debug cost varies between the file-level codes
and repo-level codes and repo-level codes generally need more cost for high complexity of
codes. For example, for single-file code such as Auto2DCls, the cost is below $1 for each run
and for more complex AutoPCDet, the cost is about $1.2 using claude-sonnet-3.7. Generally,
N OVEL S EEK is a cost-efficient auto-research framework that can generate ideas and execute
codes at a reasonable cost.
3.3

Insightful Analyses

Analysis on Survey Agent. As mentioned in Sec. 2.1, survey agent mainly have two modes
(i.e., the literature review mode and the deep research mode). As shown in Fig. 4 (a), under
the literature review mode, the survey agent can search for domain-related papers and
automatically select the most relevant literature to read and extract task-related information.
For example, the agent can identify works such as "Multimodal Transformer-based Model
for Buchwald- Hartwig and Suzuki-Miyaura Reaction Yield Prediction" or "ReacLLaMA:
Merging chemical and textual information in chemical reactivity AI models" to quickly
gather foundational studies in the field. Such a process is essential for idea generation
process since the used agent may not have relevant domain knowledge, especially in
emerging fields. Besides, under deep research mode, the survey agent needs to search for
literature related to specific technical terms used in generated ideas. As shown in Fig. 4
(b), the agent updates its queries based on generated technical terms and retrieves papers
like "Large Language Models to Accelerate Organic Chemistry Synthesis" which are closely
aligned with these refined research directions. This process is highly similar to human
researchers, they initially perform a comprehensive review of the relevant field to build
foundational knowledge, and then search for articles focused on specific techniques to
further refine the research direction.
Analysis on Idea Innovation Agent. Idea innovation agent can first generate ideas and
then evolve the generated ideas in an iterative manner. We take the idea evolution tree as an
example to show the iterative process of polishing ideas. As shown in Fig. 3, the root node
15

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Table 8: Ablation Study on Adaptive Evolution (AE). Ideas (i/s/t) shows the number of
ideas that improved performance, the number of ideas that successfully ran, and the total
number of ideas tested (format: improved / successful / tested).
AutoRYP

Method
Baseline
N OVEL S EEK (w/o AE)
N OVEL S EEK

Auto2DCls

AutoSenCls

Max R2

Avg R2

Ideas (i/s/t)

Max Acc

Avg Acc

Ideas (i/s/t)

Max Acc

Avg Acc

Ideas (i/s/t)

27.6
34.7
35.4

27.6
33.0
33.5

2/5/10
4/6/10

81.2
81.6
83.3

81.2
81.5
82.2

2/5/10
5/7/10

91.0
92.4
93.5

91.0
91.9
92.5

6/8/10
9/9/10

Initital Keyword Queries:
LLaMA, LoRA adapter, regression model, reaction yield prediction, SMILES fine-tuning
Mode: Literature Review

Mode:Deep Research

1. DRG-LLaMA : Tuning LLaMA Model to Predict
Diagnosis-related Group for Hospitalized Patients

New Keyword Queries:
AI chemistry, molecular property prediction, reaction
modeling, transformer, SMILES optimization

2. LoRA-Pro: Are Low-Rank Adapters Properly
Optimized

1. Pre-training Transformers for Molecular Property
Prediction Using Reaction Prediction

3. Multimodal Transformer-based Model for BuchwaldHartwig and Suzuki-Miyaura Reaction Yield Prediction

2. Demystifying Molecules: Unveiling the Power of AI in
Computational Chemistry

4. ReacLLaMA: Merging chemical and textual
information in chemical reactivity AI models

3. Permutation invariant graph-to-sequence model for
template-free retrosynthesis and reaction prediction

…

5. HaLoRA: Hardware-aware Low-Rank Adaptation for
Large Language Models Based on Hybrid Compute-inMemory Architecture

New Keyword Queries:
large language models, chemistry reaction yield
optimization, embedding molecular representation

6. Regression with Large Language Models for
Materials and Molecular Property Prediction

1. Large Language Models to Accelerate Organic
Chemistry Synthesis

7. AI-Guided Design of MALDI Matrices: Exploring the
Electron Transfer Chemical Space for Mass
Spectrometric Analysis of Low-Molecular-Weight
Compounds

2. Exploring BERT for Reaction Yield Prediction:
Evaluating the Impact of Tokenization, Molecular
Representation, and Pretraining Data Augmentation.

8. Generative LLMs in Organic Chemistry:
Transforming Esterification Reactions into Natural
Language Procedures

3. Chemist-X: Large Language Model-empowered Agent
for Reaction Condition Recommendation in Chemical
Synthesis

…

…

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Analysis of two modes on survey agent.

(i.e., Init Idea 0) denotes an initially generated idea and the child nodes are evolved from the
parent node. As ideas continue to evolve, more external knowledge sourced from the survey
agent is incorporated into ideas, which enriches the content and enhances the practicality
of the ideas. For example, starting with a basic idea such as "adding a graph-derived
reaction descriptor as a precondition for attention scores in the transformer architecture",
the agent refines and evolves the ideas in an iterative manner. At each step, the evolved
idea shows improvements over its predecessor in terms of technical sophistication, novelty,
or practical applicability. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the process can involve incorporating
more specific chemical descriptors, introducing cross-modality attention mechanisms, or
leveraging hierarchical architectures, with each evolution step guided by additional insights
from literature or domain knowledge, thus ensuring continuous advancement of the ideas.
Analysis on Idea-to-Methodology Phase. The correspondence between an idea and its final
code implementation plays a crucial role in assessing the effectiveness of the idea since the
idea can be verified once the experiments have been conducted. The goal of the idea-tomethodology process is to generate detailed methodologies so that code can be written based
on these comprehensive method descriptions (e.g., method-level descriptions in research
16

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Table 9: Comparison with AI-Scientist-V2 and AI-Researcher on AutoRYP and Auto2DCls
task. Total cost means the cost of the whole session. For each task, we conduct 10 experiments. AI-Scientist-V2 and AI-Researcher demonstrate relatively weak baseline improvement capabilities, with AI-Scientist-V2 in particular struggling to write code that runs
correctly. The primary reason lies in the fact that AI-Scientist-V2’s pipeline utilizes limited
task-related information (e.g. task formulation and type, relevant papers, and commonly
used code) when generating new ideas or coding. As a result, their generated ideas tend to
be more divergent and difficult to implement.
AutoRYP

Method
Baseline
AI-Scientist-V2 (Yamada et al., 2025)
AI-Researcher (Lab, 2025)
N OVEL S EEK

Auto2DCls

Max R2

Avg R2

Total Cost

Max Acc

Avg Acc

Total cost

27.6
12.3
35.4

27.6
33.5

15$
25$
3$

81.2
80.3
83.3

81.2
82.2

10$
32$
3$

papers). As illustrated in Fig. 5, our idea-to-method approach enables the generation of
fine-grained methodologies, which facilitates accurate and faithful code implementation.
Analysis on Evolutionary Experimental Planning and Execution. To verify the effectiveness
of the adaptive evolution (AE), we conduct ablation studies on three tasks, ranging from
AI tasks to scientific tasks including AutoRYP, Auto2DCls, and AutoSenCls. As shown in
Tab. 8, the performance can be further improved on multiple tasks with adaptive evolution.
For example, on the image classification task, both the max accuracy and the mean accuracy
can be improved by 1.7% and 0.7%, compared to the setting without AE. This is because
our coder agent can automatically analyze the previous results and baseline results and
further re-plan the following experiments. Besides, the successful execution rate and the
percentage of performance gains will also improve (e.g., on AutoRYP, the percentage of
performance gains is 40% compared to 20% without AE). This is due to with AE, the coder
will implement the idea step by step and analyze the experimental phenomena after each
stage of the experiments.
Improving Baseline in Multi-Dimension. N OVEL S EEK not only can improve the performance on different tasks, but it also enhance the quality of ideas in other dimensions. For
example, as shown in Tab. 7, on few-shot yield prediction task. We find that the results of
baseline methods are unstable, for the results of multiple repeated experiments tend to exhibit large variance (e.g., 24.2±4.2 when train-set=60). In contrast, the methods proposed by
N OVEL S EEK can improve both the performance and the stability of the results. For example,
when the train-set=60, ADAGT proposed by N OVEL S EEK achieves 34.8 average R2 across
5 repeated experiments compared to 24.2 achieved by the baseline method. Besides, the
variance of the results achieved by ADAGT (i.e., ±1.1) is much lower than baseline methods
(i.e., ±4.2). This phenomenon further shows the quality of ideas and code implementation
of N OVEL S EEK.
Comparison with AI-Researcher. We evaluate the performance and cost of N OVEL S EEK
and AI-Researcher (Lab, 2025) on AutoRYP and Auto2DCls research tasks. To ensure a fair
comparison, we supplied AI-Researcher with the same code templates that N OVEL S EEK
uses. Both systems employ GPT-4o-2024-08-06 for idea generation and Claude-3-7-Sonnet20250219 for code generation. As shown in Tab. 9, N OVEL S EEK outperforms both the
baseline methods and AI-Researcher across both tasks, whereas AI-Researcher is unable
to improve the provided baselines. One important reason for N OVEL S EEK’s outstanding
performance is its ability to generate novel ideas through extensive search and reflection.
Moreover, N OVEL S EEK has a complete experimental planning and adaptive evolution mechanism, thereby enabling it to achieve better performance. In contrast, the idea generated by
AI-Researcher is more dependent on user-provided reference papers, limiting its novelty.
Moreover, AI-Researcher often ignore the prior information of the existing codebases, which
further hinders its performance. In terms of cost, N OVEL S EEK is significantly more economical than AI-Researcher. For an instance, the economic cost required for N OVEL S EEK is
approximately one-sixth that of AI-Researcher on the AutoRYP task. This lower cost allows
17

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Code

Idea
Adaptive Dual-Attention Graph-Transformer with Dynamic Freezing
for Chemical Reaction Yield Prediction

class DAFM(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, embed_dim, num_heads=8, dropout=0.1):
super().__init__()
self.embed_dim = embed_dim

Enhancing SMILES and graph-derived reaction descriptor integration using a
hybrid graph-transformer network that incorporates hierarchical tokenattention mechanisms at the molecular substructure and reaction-condition
levels, combined with adaptive layer freezing for fine-tuning, will improve
chemical yield prediction by leveraging both 1D and 2D molecular
representations while minimizing overfitting.

# Self-attention for each modality
self.self_attn_smiles = SelfAttention(embed_dim, num_heads, dropout)
self.self_attn_graph = SelfAttention(embed_dim, num_heads, dropout)
self.self_attn_cond = SelfAttention(embed_dim, num_heads, dropout)
# Cross-attention between modalities
self.cross_attn_sg = CrossAttention(embed_dim, embed_dim, num_heads, dropout)
...
# Trainable weights for hierarchical aggregation
self.alpha1 = nn.Parameter(torch.ones(1))
...

Method

# Layer normalization
self.norm1 = nn.LayerNorm(embed_dim)
...

This method refines the integration of SMILES-based and graph-based reaction
descriptors by introducing a Dual-Attention Fusion Mechanism (DAFM). DAFM
systematically combines token and graph embeddings with reaction condition features,
ensuring a multi-level attention strategy for improved information flow. It incorporates
a dynamic freezing mechanism that develops a decaying threshold system for gradientbased selection of trainable layers, enhancing generalization in low-data regimes while
addressing overfitting issues.

def forward(self, smiles_embed, graph_embed, cond_embed):
# Local attention within each modality
h_s = self.self_attn_smiles(smiles_embed)
...
# Apply layer normalization
h_s = self.norm1(h_s + smiles_embed) # Residual connection
...
# Cross-modality attention
h_sg = self.cross_attn_sg(h_s, h_g)
...

### Full Algorithm
1. **Dual-Attention Fusion Mechanism (DAFM)**:
- **Local Attention within each Modality**: Employ self-attention for intra-modal
dependencies:
$$H^S = \text{SelfAttention}(E_S), \quad H^G = \text{SelfAttention}(E_G), \quad
H^Z = \text{SelfAttention}(Z)$$

# Hierarchical aggregation with trainable weights
weights = F.softmax(torch.stack([self.alpha1, self.alpha2, self.alpha3]), dim=0)
h_joint = weights[0] * h_sg + weights[1] * h_sz + weights[2] * h_gz
return h_joint

- **Cross-Modality Attention**: Fuse localized representations with pairwise crossattention among modalities. Each input modality queries the others, ensuring
representation exchange:
$$H^{SG}
=
\text{CrossAttention}(H^S,
H^G),
\quad
H^{SZ}
=
\text{CrossAttention}(H^S, H^Z), \quad H^{GZ} = \text{CrossAttention}(H^G,
H^Z).$$

class DynamicLayerFreezing:
def __init__(self, model, initial_threshold=0.01, decay_rate=0.1):
...
def compute_gradient_norms(self):
for name, param in self.model.named_parameters():
if param.grad is not None:
self.layer_grads[name] = param.grad.norm().item()

- **Hierarchical Aggregation**: Aggregate fused representations with weighted gating
for final representation:
$$H_\text{joint} = \alpha_1 H^{SG} + \alpha_2 H^{SZ} + \alpha_3 H^{GZ},$$

def update_frozen_layers(self):
threshold = self.initial_threshold * math.exp(-self.decay_rate * self.epoch)

2. **Dynamic Layer Freezing**:

for name, param in self.model.named_parameters():
if name in self.layer_grads:
if self.layer_grads[name] < threshold:
param.requires_grad = False
else:
param.requires_grad = True

- Instead of static layer freezing, use gradient magnitudes to adapt dynamically with a
formal threshold decay function:
$$\tau_t = \tau_0 e^{-\lambda t},$$
where $\tau_0$ is the initial threshold, $t$ is the training epoch, and $\lambda$
controls decay rate.
- At each epoch, compute the gradient norm $G_l$ for layer $l$:
$$G_l = \|\nabla W_l\|_2.$$
- Freeze all layers $W_l$ where $G_l < \tau_t$. This ensures only critical layers are
trained as the dataset is gradually learned.

self.epoch += 1
def step(self):
self.compute_gradient_norms()
self.update_frozen_layers()

Figure 5: Visual Examples of AutoRYP Task.
N OVEL S EEK to conduct broader scientific experiments, thereby accelerating the exploration
and validation of innovative research ideas.

4

Case Studies

4.1

Qualitative Results

In this section, we present the results from various tasks implemented using N OVEL S EEK.
4.1.1

Visual Examples of Various Tasks

We present showcases for three distinct tasks: AutoRYP, AutoMD, and AutoPower, to
highlight the innovative methodologies discovered and their applications. These showcases
are illustrated in Figs. 5, 6, and 9, respectively. Each task demonstrates a unique approach to
solving complex problems, showcasing the potential impact of N OVEL S EEK across different
scientific domains.
In the AutoRYP task illustrated in Fig. 5, N OVEL S EEK autonomously discovered an innovative approach called "Adaptive Dual-Attention Graph-Transformer with Dynamic
Freezing" for predicting chemical reaction yields. This method effectively integrates SMILES
and graph-derived descriptors using a hybrid graph-transformer network, incorporating
hierarchical attention mechanisms to enhance accuracy while minimizing overfitting. The
approach features a Dual-Attention Fusion Mechanism (DAFM) that systematically com18

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Code

Idea

class HEDGE_MP(MessagePassing):
# HEDGE-Net Message Passing with Geometry-Enhanced Directional Attention (GEDA)
def __init__(self, num_heads, hidden_channels, activation, attn_activation, cutoff,
vecnorm_type, trainable_vecnorm, last_layer=False):
super(HEDGE_MP, self).__init__(aggr="add", node_dim=0)
...
def reset_parameters(self):
...
def forward(self, x, vec, edge_index, r_ij, f_ij, d_ij):
x = self.layernorm(x)
vec = self.vec_layernorm(vec)
# Compute node features
q = self.q_proj(x).reshape(-1, self.num_heads, self.head_dim)
k = self.k_proj(x).reshape(-1, self.num_heads, self.head_dim)
v = self.v_proj(x).reshape(-1, self.num_heads, self.head_dim)
# Compute directional features
dk = self.act(self.dk_proj(f_ij)).reshape(-1, self.num_heads, self.head_dim)
dv = self.act(self.dv_proj(f_ij)).reshape(-1, self.num_heads, self.head_dim)
# Compute vector projections
vec1, vec2, vec3 = torch.split(self.vec_proj(vec), self.hidden_channels, dim=-1)
vec_dot = (vec1 * vec2).sum(dim=1)

Hierarchical Equivariant Directional Graph Encoder for Molecular Energy and Force
Prediction
Developing a molecular modeling framework based on SE(3)-equivariant graph neural
networks with hierarchical geometric self-attention and multi-hop message enrichment
enables precise energy and force predictions for large molecules. By focusing on
directional substructural features and leveraging anisotropic graph kernels, this design
captures interacting atomic patterns and propagates dynamic weight updates to align
with molecular geometry's local and global scales.

Method
HEDGE-Net introduces a refined SE(3)-equivariant graph neural network for molecular
energy and force prediction, focusing on hierarchical geometric aggregation and
improved anisotropic message passing. Leveraging a Geometry-Enhanced Directional
Attention (GEDA) mechanism, it directly integrates angular and directional features
into aggregated substructures, while ensuring SE(3)-equivariance throughout the
pipeline. The method enables effective learning across both atomic and substructural
scales, preserving scalability and precision for complex molecular systems.
### Full Algorithm
**Input**: Molecular graph $G = (V, E)$, features $\mathbf{h}_i$, position vectors
$\mathbf{d}_{ij}$.
**Output**: Energy prediction $E(G)$, atomic forces $\mathbf{F}_i$.
1. Initialize $\mathbf{h}_i^{(0)}$ for all nodes.
2. For each layer $t = 1, \dots, T$:
a. Compute augmented geometric encodings $\mathbf{g}_{ijk}^{(\mathrm{aug})}$.
b. Calculate attention weights $\alpha_{ij}$ using GEDA.
c. Aggregate atomic features $\mathbf{m}_i$ and update embeddings $\mathbf{h}_
i^{(t+1)}$.
3. Group nodes into substructures and compute substructural embeddings $\mathbf
{h}_c$.

# Compute substructure attention weights
substructure_weights = torch.sigmoid(self.substructure_attn(x))
# Propagate messages with GEDA mechanism
x, vec_out, substructure_embeddings = self.propagate(edge_index, q=q, k=k, v=v, dk=dk, dv=dv, vec=
vec, r_ij=r_ij, d_ij=d_ij, x=x,size=None,)
# Combine with substructure information
o1, o2, o3 = torch.split(self.o_proj(x), self.hidden_channels, dim=1)
dx = vec_out + o3
if not self.last_layer:
# Update edge features
df_ij = self.edge_updater(edge_index, vec=vec, d_ij=d_ij, f_ij=f_ij)
return dx, vec_out, df_ij
else:
return dx, vec_out, None
def message(self, q_i, k_j, v_j, vec_j, dk, dv, r_ij, d_ij, edge_index_i, edge_index_j, x_j):
"""Compute message using attention mechanism."""
...
attn = attn + angular_features
attn = self.attn_activation(attn) * self.cutoff(r_ij).unsqueeze(1)
...
return v_j, vec_j, substructure_embedding
def edge_update(self, vec_i, vec_j, d_ij, f_ij):
"""Update edge features."""
w1 = self.vector_rejection(self.w_trg_proj(vec_i), d_ij)
w2 = self.vector_rejection(self.w_src_proj(vec_j), -d_ij)
w_dot = (w1 * w2).sum(dim=1)
df_ij = self.act(self.f_proj(f_ij)) * w_dot
return df_ij

4. Aggregate global features for energy prediction $E(G)$:
$$
E(G) = g\left( \sum_{c \in C} \mathbf{W}_E \mathbf{h}_c \right),
$$
where $g(\cdot)$ is a differentiable pooling function.
5. Backpropagate energy gradients to compute forces $\mathbf{F}_i = -\partial
E(G)/\partial \mathbf{r}_i$.

def aggregate(self, features, index, ptr, dim_size):
...
def update(self, inputs):
...
VIS_MP_MAP = {'Node': ViS_MP_Vertex_Node, 'Edge': ViS_MP_Vertex_Edge, 'None': ViS_MP, 'HEDGE': H
EDGE_MP}

Figure 6: Visual Examples of AutoMD Task.

bines token and graph embeddings with reaction conditions, ensuring effective information
flow across different representations. Furthermore, a dynamic layer freezing mechanism,
based on gradient magnitudes, optimizes which layers are trained, thereby enhancing
generalization in low-data scenarios. Implemented with self-attention and cross-modality
attention modules, this system not only combines 1D and 2D molecular representations
effectively but also improves prediction accuracy and model adaptability. Consequently, this
showcase underscores the method’s potential for advancing research in complex chemical
tasks using deep learning.
In the AutoMD task illustrated in Fig. 6, a novel framework called "Hierarchical Equivariant
Directional Graph Encoder" (HEDGE-Net) has been autonomously discovered for predicting molecular energy and forces. This approach utilizes SE(3)-equivariant graph neural
networks with hierarchical geometric self-attention and multi-hop message enrichment.
By integrating angular and directional features into aggregated substructures, the method
captures interacting atomic patterns and propagates dynamic weight updates, aligning
with both local and global molecular geometries. The core of this method, the GeometryEnhanced Directional Attention (GEDA) mechanism, ensures SE(3)-equivariance, enabling
precise predictions for complex molecular systems at both atomic and substructural scales.
Implemented with advanced message passing techniques, HEDGE-Net effectively combines
directional and substructural information, enhancing scalability and precision in molecular
modeling. This showcases the method’s potential to advance research in complex molecular
tasks using deep learning techniques.
19

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Method
HGANET combining a refined hierarchical graph neural network (HGNN)
with density-sensitive neighborhood graph construction and an optimized
multi-head self-attentive mechanism tailored for 3D point cloud
classification. The approach introduces, …

Initial Planning
Apply Density-aware kNN algorithm
Build hierarchical graph neural network
Integrate multi-head self-attention

Performance Reflection
+0.5% Acc improvement
Identify attention/fusion as next focus

Evolutionary Planning

Performance Reflection
+1.2% Acc improvement
Continue to explore feature enhancement

Strengthen attention mechanism
Enable cross-layer feature interaction

Evolutionary Planning
Introduce adaptive kNN algorithm
Introduce the channel attention
Apply feature regularization

Performance Reflection
+1.6% Acc improvement
Need to consider advanced fusion/loss

Evolutionary Planning
Add spatial attention mechanism
Employ dynamic feature fusion
Optimize the center loss functiom

Performance Reflection
-0.8% Acc degradation
Rethink and simplify model complexity

Evolutionary Planning
Remove spatial attention and central loss
Improve cross-layer feature interaction
Use cosine annealing schedule

Final Performance
+2.1% Acc improvement

Figure 7: Visual Examples of Experimental Planning and Adaptive Evolution on Auto3DCls
task.
4.1.2

Visual Examples of Experimental Planning and Adaptive Evolution

To further illustrate the practical utility of our experimental planning and adaptive evolution
framework as described in Sec. 2.3.2, we present some concrete examples of its application
in the development and optimization for 3D point cloud classification and transcription
prediction for perturbation response. Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 visually summarize the stepwise
experimental planning and adaptive evolution process that guided the implementation and
refinement of our method.
4.2

Human Evaluation

Table 10 compares the novelty of ideas generated by our N OVEL S EEK and AI-ScientistV2 (Yamada et al., 2025), across various research tasks. Each task involves generating 20
ideas, which are evaluated by five qualified reviewers. The assessments focus on four
20

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Table 10: From the perspectives of soundness, contribution, and overall, we compare the
novelty of ideas generated by N OVEL S EEK and AI-Scientist-V2 (Yamada et al., 2025). For
each research task, we generate 20 ideas. Each idea is scored by 5 qualified reviewers, and
the final score for each task is reported as the average score of all 20 ideas. The detailed
scores for each idea can be found in the Appendix B.1.
Research Task

Idea-gen Method

Soundness

Contribution

Overall

Confidence

Reaction Yield Prediction
Reaction Yield Prediction

AI-Scientist-V2
N OVEL S EEK

1.42
3.09

1.45
2.66

3.50
4.35

3.50
4.00

2D Semantic Segmentation
2D Semantic Segmentation

AI-Scientist-V2
N OVEL S EEK

1.84
2.41

2.07
2.35

2.95
4.05

3.64
3.48

2D Image Classification
2D Image Classification

AI-Scientist-V2
N OVEL S EEK

2.78
3.15

2.82
3.10

4.40
5.85

3.87
3.32

Point Cloud Autonomous Driving
Point Cloud Autonomous Driving

AI-Scientist-V2
N OVEL S EEK

2.15
2.75

2.47
2.95

3.10
5.10

3.94
4.10

criteria: soundness, contribution, overall rating, and confidence. For each research task, the
average scores of the 20 ideas are reported.
In the Reaction Yield Prediction task, N OVEL S EEK outperforms AI-Scientist-V2 in all aspects,
especially in overall rating and soundness. Similarly, for 2D Semantic Segmentation, N OVEL S EEK shows better idea generation ability, particularly in soundness and overall rating. In
2D Image Classification and Point Cloud Autonomous Driving, N OVEL S EEK scores higher
across all criteria, indicating a consistent advantage over AI-Scientist-V2 in generating more
effective and novel ideas.

5

Related Works

Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) and agent-based systems have demonstrated significant potential in the field of Autonomous Scientific Research (ASR), enabling
progress from creative idea generation to end-to-end research automation. Some studies (Li
et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024) have shown that LLMs are capable of
generating novel research ideas, which has sparked widespread discussion in the academic
community. For example, Li et al. (2024b) introduce a method that derives research ideas
through the analysis of interconnected scholarly works. Beyond idea generation, several
studies have examined the use of LLMs for hypothesis formulation, such as extracting hypotheses from large-scale web data (Yang et al., 2023) or scientific literature (Wang et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2024). However, most of these efforts remain at the stage of idea or hypothesis
generation, lacking systematic empirical validation of their practical effectiveness.
In terms of end-to-end research automation, Lu et al. (2024) introduced the AI Scientist
framework, which was among the first to achieve a fully automated pipeline in the machine
learning domain, covering problem definition, experimental execution, and result reporting.
The subsequent AI Scientist-V2 (Yamada et al., 2025) further enhanced the framework by incorporating agent tree search, vision-language model feedback, and parallelized experiment
execution, leading to the first workshop paper fully generated and peer-reviewed by AI.
Similarly, systems such as AI-Researcher (Lab, 2025) and Dolphin (Yuan et al., 2025) have
proposed closed-loop, LLM-driven frameworks that automate the entire research process
on a range of simple tasks.
Human-AI collaboration is gaining traction in ASR. Systems like Agent Laboratory (Schmidgall et al., 2025) integrate human feedback into multi-stage LLM agent workflows, automating literature review, experiment execution, and report writing, while allowing user input at each step to enhance research quality. AgentRxiv (Schmidgall & Moor,
2025) addresses the collaborative nature of scientific discovery by enabling LLM agent laboratories to communicate and build upon each other’s work via a shared preprint server, thus
facilitating knowledge sharing and collective innovation. Experimental results demonstrate
that agent laboratories utilizing AgentRxiv for collaboration achieve greater performance
21

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

improvements compared to isolated settings. Similarly, AI Co-Scientist (Gottweis et al.,
2025), based on Gemini 2.0, employs a multi-agent system with a "generate-debate-evolve"
strategy for hypothesis generation, and has demonstrated effectiveness in biomedical domains such as drug repurposing, novel target identification, and interpretation of bacterial
evolution, with several hypotheses validated through experiments.
Despite these advances, most current systems are still evaluated primarily on relatively
simple tasks or within narrow scientific domains. However, when applied to more complex,
system-level scientific challenges, these approaches often face significant limitations. Key
challenges include generating truly novel and scientifically sound research ideas, establishing robust closed-loop feedback between experiments and idea generation, and developing
systematic evaluation standards to rigorously assess the effectiveness and real-world value
of autonomous research systems.

6

Conclusion and Future Works

Summary. We have introduced a closed-loop multi-agent framework for the first time,
which supports 12 types of scientific research tasks. It has been validated to generate novel
ideas and transform these ideas into code that can effectively improve performance. N OVEL S EEK refines the initially generated ideas through human-interactive feedback enriched
with a self-evolutionary path of ideas. It facilitates the transformation from coarse-grained
proposals to fine-grained methodologies via an idea-to-methodology construction process.
Furthermore, by leveraging multi-round experimental planning and execution, it implements the corresponding theoretical methods, thereby completing the closed-loop process
in scientific research—from hypothesis generation to verification.
Future Outlook. N OVEL S EEK faces several key technical challenges that need to be addressed in the future:
• Knowledge Retrieval: This involves establishing connections and relationships
between papers, utilizing deep research techniques to conduct extensive searches
across a wide range of papers, and performing meta-analyses on the search results.
Additionally, it requires transforming the papers into structured representations
such as triples, and utilizing graph networks to uncover relationships between
papers, including associations in paper ideas, methodologies, experimental conditions, and experimental results. Moreover, retrieval-augmented generation will be
employed to alleviate the hallucination issues of LLMs when generating viewpoints
or citing references.
• Knowledge Understanding and Representation: This involves utilizing VLM/LLM
to accurately analyze relevant academic papers, aiming to understand the significance of their core concepts, methodologies, and research findings, while also
refining knowledge and formulating hypotheses. Additionally, it focuses on extracting valuable knowledge from a large number of papers, identifying common
patterns, trends, and connections, thereby advancing the understanding and representation of knowledge in the field.
• Agent Capability Enhancement: This focuses on improving the ability of AI systems
to autonomously perform complex tasks in scientific research. The strength of agents
lies in their ability to dynamically adapt, rather than solely relying on historical
records to determine subsequent actions. Through self-modification, they can
flexibly redefine their initial goals and planning strategies while utilizing feedback,
as well as communication logs between agents or between humans and agents, to
train and improve themselves. This mechanism should focus on improving their
ability to gather feedback from three key sources: the environment, interactions
with other agents, and human experts.
• Scientific Discovery-related Benchmark Construction: This involves evaluating the
value that an idea can bring, rather than simply evaluating its novelty. It also includes evaluating whether the methods proposed by AI align with their correspond22

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

ing code implementations and determining whether N OVEL S EEK demonstrates a
certain level of generalization ability in broader scientific scenarios.

References
Cosmas D Arnold, Daniel Gerlach, Christoph Stelzer, Łukasz M Boryń, Martina Rath,
and Alexander Stark. Genome-wide quantitative enhancer activity maps identified by
starr-seq. Science, 339(6123):1074–1077, 2013.
Liang-Chieh Chen, Yukun Zhu, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam.
Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmentation. In
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 801–818, 2018.
Zhe Chen, Weiyun Wang, Hao Tian, Shenglong Ye, Zhangwei Gao, Erfei Cui, Wenwen Tong,
Kongzhi Hu, Jiapeng Luo, Zheng Ma, et al. How far are we to gpt-4v? closing the gap
to commercial multimodal models with open-source suites. Science China Information
Sciences, 67(12):220101, 2024.
Stefan Chmiela, Alexandre Tkatchenko, Huziel E Sauceda, Igor Poltavsky, Kristof T Schütt,
and Klaus-Robert Müller. Machine learning of accurate energy-conserving molecular
force fields. Science advances, 3(5):e1603015, 2017.
Bernardo P de Almeida, Franziska Reiter, Michaela Pagani, and Alexander Stark. Deepstarr
predicts enhancer activity from dna sequence and enables the de novo design of synthetic
enhancers. Nature genetics, 54(5):613–624, 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
4171–4186, 2019.
M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisserman. The PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge 2012 (VOC2012) Results. http://www.pascalnetwork.org/challenges/VOC/voc2012/workshop/index.html, 2012.
Paul Gauthier and Aider-AI Contributors. Aider: Ai pair programming in your terminal.
https://github.com/Aider-AI/aider, 2023. URL https://github.com/Aider-AI/aider.
Accessed: 2025-05-07.
Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar Sirkovic,
Artiom Myaskovsky, Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryutaro Tanno, et al. Towards an
ai co-scientist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864, 2025.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in
llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark,
AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny
images. 2009.
HKU Data Intelligence Lab. Ai-researcher: Fully-automated scientific discovery with
llm agents. https://github.com/HKUDS/AI-Researcher, 2025. URL https://github.com/
HKUDS/AI-Researcher.
Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang,
Peiyuan Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, et al. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03326, 2024a.
23

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Long Li, Weiwen Xu, Jiayan Guo, Ruochen Zhao, Xinxuan Li, Yuqian Yuan, Boqiang Zhang,
Yuming Jiang, Yifei Xin, Ronghao Dang, et al. Chain of ideas: Revolutionizing research in
novel idea development with llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13185, 2024b.
Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The
ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.06292, 2024.
Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chunyuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao
Cheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02255,
2023.
Ruilin Luo, Zhuofan Zheng, Yifan Wang, Yiyao Yu, Xinzhe Ni, Zicheng Lin, Jin Zeng, and
Yujiu Yang. Ursa: Understanding and verifying chain-of-thought reasoning in multimodal
mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04686, 2025.
Jiageng Mao, Minzhe Niu, Chenhan Jiang, Hanxue Liang, Jingheng Chen, Xiaodan Liang,
Yamin Li, Chaoqiang Ye, Wei Zhang, Zhenguo Li, et al. One million scenes for autonomous
driving: Once dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11037, 2021.
Thomas M Norman, Max A Horlbeck, Joseph M Replogle, Alex Y Ge, Albert Xu, Marco
Jost, Luke A Gilbert, and Jonathan S Weissman. Exploring genetic interaction manifolds
constructed from rich single-cell phenotypes. Science, 365(6455):786–793, 2019.
Damith Perera, Joseph W Tucker, Shalini Brahmbhatt, Christopher J Helal, Ashley Chong,
William Farrell, Paul Richardson, and Neal W Sach. A platform for automated nanomolescale reaction screening and micromole-scale synthesis in flow. Science, 359(6374):429–434,
2018.
Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on
point sets for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017.
Yansheng Qiu, Haoquan Zhang, Zhaopan Xu, Ming Li, Diping Song, Zheng Wang, and
Kaipeng Zhang. Ai idea bench 2025: Ai research idea generation benchmark. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.14191, 2025.
Yusuf Roohani, Kexin Huang, and Jure Leskovec. Predicting transcriptional outcomes of
novel multigene perturbations with gears. Nature Biotechnology, 42(6):927–935, 2024.
Samuel Schmidgall and Michael Moor. Agentrxiv: Towards collaborative autonomous
research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18102, 2025.
Samuel Schmidgall, Yusheng Su, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong Yu, Jiang
Liu, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. Agent laboratory: Using llm agents as research
assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04227, 2025.
Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Can llms generate novel research ideas? a
large-scale human study with 100+ nlp researchers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04109, 2024.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y
Ng, and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over
a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing, pp. 1631–1642, 2013.
OpenPCDet Development Team. Openpcdet: An open-source toolbox for 3d object detection
from point clouds. https://github.com/open-mmlab/OpenPCDet, 2020.
Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing
Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, et al. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s
perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191, 2024a.
24

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Qingyun Wang, Doug Downey, Heng Ji, and Tom Hope. Scimon: Scientific inspiration
machines optimized for novelty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14259, 2023.
Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge,
Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma,
Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan
Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. OpenHands:
An Open Platform for AI Software Developers as Generalist Agents, 2024b. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2407.16741.
Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi
Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, et al. Openhands: An open platform for ai
software developers as generalist agents. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024c.
Yusong Wang, Tong Wang, Shaoning Li, Xinheng He, Mingyu Li, Zun Wang, Nanning
Zheng, Bin Shao, and Tie-Yan Liu. Enhancing geometric representations for molecules
with equivariant vector-scalar interactive message passing. Nature Communications, 15(1):
313, 2024d.
Zhirong Wu, Shuran Song, Aditya Khosla, Fisher Yu, Linguang Zhang, Xiaoou Tang, and
Jianxiong Xiao. 3d shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1912–1920, 2015.
Yutaro Yamada, Robert Tjarko Lange, Cong Lu, Shengran Hu, Chris Lu, Jakob Foerster, Jeff
Clune, and David Ha. The ai scientist-v2: Workshop-level automated scientific discovery
via agentic tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08066, 2025.
Xiangchao Yan, Shiyang Feng, Jiakang Yuan, Renqiu Xia, Bin Wang, Bo Zhang, and Lei
Bai. Surveyforge: On the outline heuristics, memory-driven generation, and multidimensional evaluation for automated survey writing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04629,
2025.
An Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bofei Gao, Bowen Yu, Chengpeng Li, Dayiheng
Liu, Jianhong Tu, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen2. 5-math technical report:
Toward mathematical expert model via self-improvement, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2409.12122.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li,
Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al. Qwen2. 5 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.15115, 2024.
Zonglin Yang, Xinya Du, Junxian Li, Jie Zheng, Soujanya Poria, and Erik Cambria. Large
language models for automated open-domain scientific hypotheses discovery. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.02726, 2023.
Tianwei Yin, Xingyi Zhou, and Philipp Krahenbuhl. Center-based 3d object detection and
tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pp. 11784–11793, 2021.
Jiakang Yuan, Xiangchao Yan, Botian Shi, Tao Chen, Wanli Ouyang, Bo Zhang, Lei Bai,
Yu Qiao, and Bowen Zhou. Dolphin: Closed-loop open-ended auto-research through
thinking, practice, and feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03916, 2025.
Sergey Zagoruyko. Wide residual networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07146, 2016.
Ailing Zeng, Muxi Chen, Lei Zhang, and Qiang Xu. Are transformers effective for time
series forecasting? In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37,
pp. 11121–11128, 2023.
Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for
language image pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision, pp. 11975–11986, 2023.
25

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Zhen Zhao, Zhen Huang, Zicheng Wang, Wenqi Huang, and LEI BAI. Senseflow: A physicsinformed and self-ensembling iterative framework for power flow estimation, 2024. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=UKiCFpwcqY.
Haoyi Zhou, Shanghang Zhang, Jieqi Peng, Shuai Zhang, Jianxin Li, Hui Xiong, and Wancai
Zhang. Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting.
In The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Virtual Conference,
volume 35, pp. 11106–11115. AAAI Press, 2021.
Yangqiaoyu Zhou, Haokun Liu, Tejes Srivastava, Hongyuan Mei, and Chenhao Tan. Hypothesis generation with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04326, 2024.
Ray Daniel Zimmerman, Carlos Edmundo Murillo-Sánchez, and Robert John Thomas.
Matpower: Steady-state operations, planning, and analysis tools for power systems
research and education. IEEE Transactions on power systems, 26(1):12–19, 2010.

26

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Appendix
A

Contributions and Acknowledgments
Enhancer Activity Prediction: Zhiyin Yu
VLM finetuning: Tianshuo Peng

1. Core Contributors
Bo Zhang
Shiyang Feng
Xiangchao Yan
Jiakang Yuan

4. Software Development
Zheng Nie, Zhilong Wang, Runmin Ma,
Jinyao Liu, Shiyang Feng, Xiangchao Yan

2. Multi-agent System Algorithm Design
Self-Evolving Idea: Shiyang Feng
Idea-to-Methodology: Xiangchao Yan
Coder: Shiyang Feng, Jiakang Yuan, Xiangchao Yan
Multi-round Experimental Plan: Jiakang
Yuan, Bo Zhang, Xiangchao Yan, Shiyang
Feng

5. Manuscript Preparation
Shiyang Feng, Bo Zhang, Xiangchao Yan,
Jiakang Yuan, Zhiyin Yu, Songtao Huang,
Lei Bai, Xiaohan He, Tianshuo Peng
6. Idea Human Evaluation Specialist

Bo Zhang, Peng Ye, Shufei Zhang, Dongzhan
3. Scientific Research Task Integration and Zhou, Xiaosong Wang, Lei Bai
Enhancement
Reaction Yield Prediction: Xiaohan He,
Zhiyin Yu
Molecular Dynamics: Zhiyin Yu
Power Flow Estimation: Songtao Huang
Time Series Forecasting: Songtao Huang
Sentiment CLS: Xiangchao Yan, Jiakang
Yuan
3D Point CLS: Xiangchao Yan, Jiakang Yuan
2D Image CLS: Xiangchao Yan, Jiakang Yuan
2D Semantic Segmentation: Shiyang Feng
3D Autonomous Driving: Jiakang Yuan
Transcription Prediction: Xiaohan He, Peng
Ye

B

Evaluation Details

B.1

Scoring Criteria for Idea Review

7. Project Management and Product
Yilan Zhang, Meng Li, Shaowei Hou,
Zhongying Tu
8. Advising
Bowen Zhou, Wanli Ouyang, Xiangyu Yue
9. Project Co-lead
Lei Bai, bailei@pjlab.org.cn
Bo Zhang, zhangbo@pjlab.org.cn

In Table 10 of the main text, we conducted a human evaluation to assess the novelty of ideas
generated by AI-Scientist-V2 (Yamada et al., 2025) and our N OVEL S EEK. The evaluation was
carried out across four dimensions: soundness, contribution, overall rating, and confidence.
Specifically, considering the evaluation cost, we opted to evaluate four types of research
tasks: reaction yield prediction, 2D semantic segmentation, 2D image classification, and
point cloud autonomous driving. Each invited researcher was required to have peer-review
qualifications for top-tier journals or conferences in the relevant field. For each research task,
we generated 20 ideas using both AI-Scientist-V2 and N OVEL S EEK, and five experienced
researchers were invited to score each idea. In this part, we provide a detailed description
of the scoring criteria for each reviewer, as outlined below:
Soundness:
• 4 excellent
27

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

• 3 good
• 2 fair
• 1 poor
Contribution:
• 4 excellent
• 3 good
• 2 fair
• 1 poor
Overall:
• Rating: 10: Award quality: Technically flawless paper with groundbreaking impact
on one or more areas of AI, with exceptionally strong evaluation, reproducibility,
and resources, and no unaddressed ethical considerations.
• Rating: 9: Very Strong Accept: Technically flawless paper with groundbreaking
impact on at least one area of AI and excellent impact on multiple areas of AI, with
flawless evaluation, resources, and reproducibility, and no unaddressed ethical
considerations.
• Rating: 8: Strong Accept: Technically strong paper with, with novel ideas, excellent
impact on at least one area of AI or high-to-excellent impact on multiple areas of
AI, with excellent evaluation, resources, and reproducibility, and no unaddressed
ethical considerations.
• Rating: 7: Accept: Technically solid paper, with high impact on at least one subarea of AI or moderate-to-high impact on more than one area of AI, with goodto-excellent evaluation, resources, reproducibility, and no unaddressed ethical
considerations.
• Rating: 6: Weak Accept: Technically solid, moderate-to-high impact paper, with
no major concerns with respect to evaluation, resources, reproducibility, ethical
considerations.
• Rating: 5: Borderline accept: Technically solid paper where reasons to accept
outweigh reasons to reject, e.g., limited evaluation. Please use sparingly.
• Rating: 4: Borderline reject: Technically solid paper where reasons to reject, e.g.,
limited evaluation, outweigh reasons to accept, e.g., good evaluation. Please use
sparingly.
• Rating: 3: Reject: For instance, a paper with technical flaws, weak evaluation,
inadequate reproducibility and incompletely addressed ethical considerations.
• Rating: 2: Strong Reject: For instance, a paper with major technical flaws, and/or
poor evaluation, limited impact, poor reproducibility and mostly unaddressed
ethical considerations.
• Rating: 1: Very Strong Reject: For instance, a paper with trivial results or unaddressed ethical considerations
Confidence:
• Confidence: 5: You are absolutely certain about your assessment. You are very
familiar with the related work and checked the math/other details carefully.
• Confidence: 4: You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain.
It is unlikely, but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the
submission or that you are unfamiliar with some pieces of related work.
• Confidence: 3: You are fairly confident in your assessment. It is possible that you
did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar with
some pieces of related work. Math/other details were not carefully checked.
28

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

• Confidence: 2: You are willing to defend your assessment, but it is quite likely
that you did not understand the central parts of the submission or that you are
unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. Math/other details were not carefully
checked.
• Confidence: 1: Your assessment is an educated guess. The submission is not in your
area or the submission was difficult to understand. Math/other details were not
carefully checked.
B.2

Information on the Expert Review Process

Qualifications for Human Evaluators: Evaluators must hold a Ph.D. or be Ph.D. candidates
with reviewing experience in top-tier AI conferences such as ICLR, ICML, NeurIPS, CVPR,
ICCV, and ACL.
Steps for Expert Evaluation and Validation:
• Before the evaluation begins, evaluators are required to carefully read the scoring
guidelines, as outlined in Appendix B.1.
• Each evaluator is assigned 20 ideas generated by N OVELSEEK and 20 ideas generated by AI-Scientist-V2 (Yamada et al., 2025). For each idea, evaluators must
carefully review the generated content and provide final scores across four dimensions: Soundness, Contribution, Overall, and Confidence.
• Qualified evaluators are required to spend at least 10 minutes reading each idea.
During the evaluation process, they are allowed to conduct relevant literature
searches and verify idea redundancy to ensure that the scoring results are objective
and representative.

C

N OVEL S EEK Software Development

Fig. 13 shows the front-end interface of the current N OVEL S EEK software platform. Overall,
N OVEL S EEK software platform employs a frontend-backend separation design pattern,
building a highly scalable distributed service platform.
The frontend layer is developed based on the React framework, featuring an advanced
visual interaction system. Key innovations include an infinite canvas rendering engine
supporting multi-node topology, a collaborative mind mapping component driven by state
synchronization, a code editor supporting multiple formats, and a real-time training metrics
visualization dashboard.
The backend leverages a cloud-native technology stack, utilizing a dynamic container
orchestration engine for elastic resource scheduling, a distributed asynchronous task queue
for high concurrency support, and a cross-cloud storage gateway for data synchronization
across heterogeneous cloud environments. Additionally, a microservice governance system
is established using a Service Mesh architecture.
The entire system is delivered through containerization, with Kubernetes cluster management enabling self-healing and intelligent scaling, ensuring business continuity while
significantly improving resource utilization efficiency.

D

Visualization Results

We further conducted detailed visualization and analysis around the multi-round experimental planning and execution (Fig. 8) in N OVEL S EEK, as well as the automated scientific
research tasks (Figs. 9, 10, 11 and 12) supported by N OVEL S EEK.
Fig. 8 illustrates the process of Experimental Planning and Adaptive Evolution on AutoTPPR.
Each block in the figure represents a step in the multi-round experiment planning process,
where the complete N OVEL S EEK-generated method is decomposed into multiple logical
29

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Method
The GEARS_LocalRegularization framework improves upon the existing
GEARS methodology by introducing biologically-grounded, local graph
regularization that explicitly connects spectral graph penalties to
biological domain knowledge, such as chromatin interactions and ...

Initial Planning
Implement local graph regularization
Add perturbation-aware embedding alignment
Add regularization terms in loss function

Performance Reflection
0.038 MSE improvement
Explore adaptive regularization and feature
selection

Evolutionary Planning

Performance Reflection
0.040 MSE improvement
Adaptive regularization needs tuning

Implement adaptive regularization strength
Improve sophisticated transformation
Focus on biologically relevant features

Evolutionary Planning
Simplify regularization mechanism
Introduce curriculum learning
Optimize balance between local regularization
and perturbation alignment

Performance Reflection
0.045 MSE improvement
Simplified regularization and curriculum
learning improved stability and generalization

Evolutionary Planning
Implement multi-scale local regularization
Add feature-wise attention mechanism
Optimize perturbation embedding alignment

Performance Reflection
0.047 MSE improvement
Multi-scale regularization and enhanced
attention further improve performance

Evolutionary Planning
Implement hierarchical regularization
Add adaptive lr for different components
Introduce knowledge-guided attention using
prior biological knowledge

Final Performance
0.051 MSE improvement

Figure 8: Visual Examples of Experimental Planning and Adaptive Evolution on AutoTPPR
task.
steps. This allows for task decomposition during the experimental validation phase, thereby
facilitating more significant benchmark results.
Furthermore, in the AutoPower task illustrated in Fig. 9, the "Adaptive Hierarchical Graph
Transformer" (AHGT) introduces significant advancements for power flow estimation in
energy systems. This approach features two key innovations: the Enhanced Edge-Node
Hierarchical Pooling (EENHPool) mechanism, which integrates global and local features to
retain crucial graph structures while reducing ambiguities, and the Stability-Regularized
Temporal Graph Transformer (SRT-GT), designed to capture temporal dynamics while
maintaining training stability. These components together enhance the model’s robustness
and accuracy, validated on IEEE benchmarks under scenarios involving renewable energy
and grid perturbations. The AHGT method outputs precise voltage magnitude and angle
predictions, assessed using metrics such as MAE, RMSE, and the Graph Perturbation
Robustness Index (GPRI). This approach showcases the potential for improved power
system modeling through advanced graph transformer techniques.

30

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Code

Idea
Adaptive Hierarchical Graph Transformer with Enhanced Pooling and Temporal
Stability for Power Flow Estimation

# ----- Enhanced Edge-Node Hierarchical Pooling (EENHPool)
class EENHPool(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, in_dim, edge_dim, hidden_dim=None):
super(EENHPool, self).__init__()
# ----- Stability-Regularized Temporal Graph Transformer (SRT-GT)
class SRT_GT(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, in_dim, hidden_dim, num_timesteps, dropout=0.1):
super(SRT_GT, self).__init__()
...
def forward(self, x_dict, edge_index_dict, edge_attr_dict, local_features, timestep):
"""Apply temporal graph transformer update with improved stability"""
...
def get_temporal_regularization_loss(self, lambda_reg=0.001):
"""Compute temporal regularization loss to enforce smoothness"""
class HybridBlock(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, ...):
super(HybridBlock, self).__init__()
...
# Enhanced Edge-Node Hierarchical Pooling
self.eenhpool = EENHPool(in_dim=emb_dim_in, edge_dim=edge_dim)
# Stability-Regularized Temporal Graph Transformer
self.srt_gt = SRT_GT(
in_dim=emb_dim_in,
hidden_dim=emb_dim_in,
num_timesteps=num_timesteps,
dropout=dropout_ratio
)
...
class PFNet(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, ...):
super(PFNet, self).__init__()
...
for channel_in, channel_out in zip(hidden_block_layers[:-1], hidden_block_layers[1:]):
self.blocks.append(HybridBlock(...) )
...
class IterGCN(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, ...):
super(IterGCN, self).__init__()
...
self.net = PFNet(...)
...
def forward(self, batch, flag_return_losses=False, flag_use_ema_infer=False, num_loop_infer=0):
...

The Adaptive Hierarchical Graph Transformer (AHGT) introduces two key innovations
to improve power flow estimation in energy systems: (1) a clarifying edge-node adaptive
pooling mechanism, Enhanced Edge-Node Hierarchical Pooling (EENHPool), which
incorporates global and local features to retain important structure and reduce
ambiguities in coarsened graph generation, and (2) a Stability-Regularized Temporal
Graph Transformer (SRT-GT) to capture temporal dynamics while maintaining stability
for efficient training over power system datasets. The model is validated on IEEE
benchmarks, incorporating renewable energy scenarios and perturbed grid networks,
evaluated with MAE, RMSE, and a detailed definition of the proposed robustness
metric, Graph Perturbation Robustness Index (GPRI).

Method
AdaptivThe Adaptive Hierarchical Graph Transformer improves the Structured
Adaptive Graph Transformer (SAGT) by addressing critical issues related to pooling
clarity, temporal dynamics, and robustness for power grid estimation tasks. Key
components include Enhanced Edge-Node Hierarchical Pooling (EENHPool) and
Stability-Regularized Temporal Graph Transformer (SRT-GT). Below is the detailed
method description.
### Full Algorithm
Algorithm: Adaptive Hierarchical Graph Transformer (AHGT)
Input: Graph $G = (\mathcal{V}, \mathcal{E}, \mathbf{X}, \mathbf{E})$, node types,
timesteps $T$.
Output: Voltage magnitudes $\hat{V}_m$, angles $\hat{V}_a$.
1. Initialize $\mathbf{X}^{(0)} \leftarrow \text{NodeEncoder}(\mathbf{X},
\text{node types})$.
2. For each timestep $t = 1, \ldots, T$:
a. Apply EENHPool: Determine node importance and lift local features.
b. Form coarsened graph $G^{(t)}$ using lifted features.
c. Compute edge-node attention for temporal graph.
d. Update node embeddings using SRT-GT with stability constraints.
3. Decode final node embeddings $\mathbf{X}^{(T)}$ to predict $\hat{V}_m,
\hat{V}_a$.
4. Return predictions $\hat{V}_m, \hat{V}_a$.

Figure 9: Visual Examples of AutoPower Task
Code

Idea
Hybrid Noise Augmentation with Psycholinguistic and Linguistic Rule Integration
for Adversarially Robust Sentiment Analysis

# Psycholinguistic feature extraction - key component for noise generation
class PsycholinguisticFeatures:
def __init__(self, lexicon_path=None):
"""Initialize psycholinguistic feature extractor"""
...

Transformer-based sentiment analysis models demonstrate measurable performance
gains and adversarial robustness on SST-2 through the use of hybrid noise
augmentation. This approach combines psycholinguistically-grounded neural text
generation with linguistic feature extraction rules for sarcasm, negation, and polysemy.
Novel curated datasets explicitly covering these linguistic phenomena and adversarial
benchmarks (e.g., TextFlint) are leveraged for validation against F1 score improvements,
error rates by phenomenon, and robustness metrics measured under low-resource and
noisy conditions.

def get_importance_score(self, token: str) -> float:
"""Calculate psycholinguistic importance score for a token"""
…
def compute_importance_for_text(self, text: str) -> List[float]:
"""Compute importance scores for each token in text"""
…
# Linguistic rule-based transformations
class LinguisticRules:
def __init__(self):
"""Initialize linguistic rule processor"""
# Sarcasm patterns for detection
self.sarcasm_patterns = [r'(so|really) (great|nice|good)']
...

Method
This method refines and extends transformer-based sentiment analysis on the SST-2
dataset by introducing a mathematically formalized and algorithmically detailed hybrid
noise augmentation approach. The refinement integrates psycholinguistically-grounded
neural text generation with rule-based handling of sarcasm, negation, and polysemy
through a unified framework. The approach uses adversarial benchmarks like TextFlint
for robustness evaluation under noisy and low-resource conditions, promoting
reproducibility and practical feasibility.

def detect_sarcasm(self, text: str) -> bool:
"""Detect sarcasm patterns in text"""
...
def apply_rule_transformations(self, token_embeddings, text, tokenizer):
"""Apply rule-based transformations to token embeddings"""
transformed_embeddings = token_embeddings.clone()
...

### Full Algorithm
1. ** Data Preprocessing**
- Input: Training dataset (D), psycholinguistic features (P), linguistic rules (L)
- For each token in D:
- Compute psycholinguistic importance scores (S) covering valence, arousal, and
dominance
- Normalize S to appropriate scaling ranges for noise generation
- Identify tokens susceptible to sarcasm, negation, and polysemy phenomena

return transformed_embeddings
# Main hybrid noise augmentation class
class HybridNoiseAugmentation:
def __init__(self, sigma=0.1, alpha=0.5, gamma=0.1, psycholinguistic_features=None, linguistic_rules=
None):
…

2. ** Hybrid Noise Generation**
- For each token embedding e:
- Generate psycholinguistic neural noise component:
$$e' = e + \mathcal{N}(0, \sigma^2 \cdot S)$$
where S reflects psycholinguistic importance scores
- Apply linguistic rule-based transformations:
$$e'' = R_{\text{rule}} \cdot e$$
using appropriate rule matrices for sarcasm, negation, or polysemy
- Compute final hybrid embedding:
$$e_\text{aug} = \alpha e' + (1 - \alpha)e''$$
with α ∈ [0,1] controlling the balance

def apply_psycholinguistic_noise(self, token_embeddings, texts, tokenizer):
"""Apply psycholinguistic-based noise to token embeddings"""
batch_size, seq_len, hidden_dim = token_embeddings.shape
noised_embeddings = token_embeddings.clone()
...
return noised_embeddings
def generate_hybrid_embeddings(self, token_embeddings, texts, tokenizer):
"""Generate hybrid embeddings combining psycholinguistic noise and rule-based transformations"""
…

3. ** Transformer Integration**
- For each batch during training:
- Replace original token embeddings with hybrid embeddings e_aug
- Modify attention mechanism to incorporate psycholinguistic alignment:

def generate_psycholinguistic_alignment_matrix(self, texts, seq_len, device):
"""Generate psycholinguistic alignment matrix for attention mechanism"""
batch_size = len(texts)
H = torch.zeros((batch_size, seq_len, seq_len), device=device)

$$
A_{\text{aug}} = \text{softmax}\left(\frac{QK^\top}{\sqrt{d_k}} + \gamma \cdot
H\right)
$$

for i, text in enumerate(texts):
# Calculate importance scores for each token
importance_scores = self.psycholinguistic_features.compute_importance_for_text(text)
…

where H emphasizes linguistic phenomena relevance
- Propagate augmented representations through transformer layers

return H

Figure 10: Visual Examples of AutoSenCls Task
31

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Code

Idea
Hierarchical Graph-Attentive Network for Efficient 3D Point Cloud
Classification

Developing a lightweight hierarchical graph neural network equipped with optimized
local neighborhood graph construction and self-attentive feature alignment for 3D
point cloud classification, aiming to balance computational efficiency and robust feature
representation leveraging hierarchical adaptation to point density and global context.
This framework incorporates density-sensitive graph construction that dynamically
adjusts neighborhood relationships based on local point distributions, coupled with
multi-level graph partitioning to capture both fine-grained details and global structures.
The optimized multi-head self-attention mechanism enables effective cross-level
feature alignment, creating a framework that efficiently processes irregular point
clouds while maintaining robustness to density variations.

def knn(x, k):
"""
Compute k-nearest neighbors for each point in the point cloud
"""
...
def get_graph_feature(x, k=20, idx=None, dim9=False):
"""Construct edge features for each point"""
...
def density_adaptive_knn(x, k_min=10, k_max=30, density_threshold=0.1, use_xyz_only=True):
"""Enhanced density-adaptive k-nearest neighbors with improved density estimation""“
...
class GraphConvolution(nn.Module):
…

Method

class GraphAttention(nn.Module):
"""Enhanced Graph Attention Layer with residual connections"""
def __init__(self, in_channels, out_channels, num_heads=8, dropout=0.1):
super(GraphAttention, self).__init__()
...
def forward(self, x):
batch_size, _, num_points = x.size()
residual = x

An enhanced method combining a refined hierarchical graph neural network (HGNN)
with density-sensitive neighborhood graph construction and an optimized multi-head
self-attentive mechanism tailored for 3D point cloud classification. The approach
introduces explicit mathematical modeling of graph construction, hierarchical
adaptation, and attention mechanisms, aimed at improving computational efficiency and
feature robustness. The hierarchical graph construction explicitly models local-toglobal relationships in a density-adaptive manner while the self-attention mechanism is
redefined to align point-level and graph-level features effectively.
### Full Algorithm

# Multi-head attention
query = self.query_conv(x).view(batch_size, self.num_heads, self.head_dim, num_points)
...

1. **Density-Sensitive Local Neighborhood Graph Construction**: For each input point
cloud $X = \{x_1, x_2, ..., x_n\}$, define $k$-nearest neighbors (kNN) graph $G =
(V, E)$, where $V$ represents points, and edges $E$ are weighted based on a
distance metric $d(x_i, x_j)$. To incorporate density variation, adaptively determine
$k$ for each point under a threshold $\epsilon$ based on local density, $\rho(x_i) =
\frac{1}{|N(x_i)|} \sum_{j \in N(x_i)} d(x_i, x_j)$.

# Compute attention scores
attention = torch.matmul(query.permute(0, 1, 3, 2), key) # [B, num_heads, N, N]
...
# Apply attention to values
out = torch.matmul(attention, value.permute(0, 1, 3, 2)) # [B, num_heads, N, head_dim]
...

2. **Hierarchical Graph Partitions**: The point set is partitioned into multiple levels,
$\{L_1, ..., L_h\}$, where $L_1$ retains finer details and higher levels (e.g., $L_h$)
aggregate global features through graph coarsening using voxelization or farthestpoint-sampling mechanisms.
3. **Graph Convolution and Pooling**: At each level $L_l$, apply spectral graph
convolution on features $H^{(l)}$:
$$
H'^{(l)} = \sigma(D^{-\frac{1}{2}} A D^{-\frac{1}{2}} H^{(l)} W^{(l)}),
$$

return out
class HierarchicalGraphLayer(nn.Module):
"""Optimized Hierarchical Graph Layer with efficient feature interaction"""
def __init__(self, in_channels, out_channels, k=20, pool_ratio=0.25):
...
def forward(self, x, adaptive_knn=False):
...
class HGANet(nn.Module):
...

4. **Attentive Feature Alignment**: For feature matrix $H^{(l)}$, compute selfattention scores $\alpha$:
$$
\alpha_{ij}=\text{softmax}\left(\frac{(H^{(l)}W_Q)(H^{(l)}W_K)^T}{\sqrt{d_k}}\right),
$$
5. **Multi-Head Aggregation**: Multi-head attention layers produce features $Z$:
$$
Z = \text{Concat}(\text{head}_1, \text{head}_2, ..., \text{head}_m) W_O,
$$

def forward(self, x, gts=None):
"""
Args:
x: input point cloud, [B, C, N]
gts: ground truth labels, [B]
Returns:
loss: loss value if gts is not None
logits: classification logits, [B, num_classes]
"""
...
class ChannelAttention(nn.Module):
"""Channel Attention Module"""
...

Figure 11: Visual Examples of Auto3DCls Task

32

NovelSeek: Starting Point of Innovation

Code

Idea
Hierarchical Adaptive Regularization and Consistency Network for Robust
Image Classification

class AdaptiveAugmentation:
def __init__(self, alpha=0.5, beta=0.5, gamma=2.0):
self.alpha = alpha
self.beta = beta
self.gamma = gamma
self.device = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu")

Develop a synergistic hierarchical framework for improving image classification that
integrates (a) adaptive, data-distribution-driven augmentation mechanisms combining
MixUp with dynamically controlled geometric transformations to enhance data
robustness, (b) a decayed temporal consistency regularization method that minimizes
stochastic noise in pseudo-labels using exponentially weighted past predictions, and (c)
auxiliary losses that explicitly optimize feature group consistency inspired by human
visual pattern differentiation, with additional grounding in loss function calibration.
This framework will be rigorously evaluated using ablation studies focusing on
compatibility and interaction among augmentation, regularization, and loss mechanisms,
alongside benchmarking against ResNet and Vision Transformer models on CIFAR-100.

def compute_variance(self, x):
# x shape: [B, C, H, W]
# Compute variance across channels for each spatial location
var = torch.var(x, dim=1, keepdim=True) # [B, 1, H, W]
return var.mean(dim=[1, 2, 3]) # [B]
def compute_entropy(self, probs):
# probs shape: [B, C] where C is number of classes
probs = torch.clamp(probs, min=1e-8, max=1.0)
...

Method
HARCNet combines hierarchical adaptive augmentation with mathematically grounded
regularization mechanisms inspired by human visual processing to improve robustness in
image classification tasks. The method integrates (1) an adaptive augmentation
mechanism that dynamically modulates geometric transformations based on data
distribution, and (2) a decayed temporal consistency regularization framework
underpinned by formal mathematical formulations, ensuring smoother pseudo-labeling
and improved convergence. These components collaborate synergistically to achieve
robust classification performance on CIFAR-100.

def get_geometric_strength(self, x, model=None, probs=None):
var = self.compute_variance(x)
# If model predictions are provided, use them for entropy calculation
...
def get_mixup_params(self, y, num_classes=100):
# Generate MixUp parameters based on label entropy
y_onehot = F.one_hot(y, num_classes=num_classes).float()
...

### Full Algorithm

def apply_mixup(self, x, y, num_classes=100):
"""Apply MixUp augmentation with adaptive coefficient"""
lam, index = self.get_mixup_params(y, num_classes)
...

1. **Adaptive Augmentation Phase**: Input images are preprocessed using dynamically
tuned MixUp and geometric transformations based on their variance and entropy.
Let $S_{g}$ represent the geometric augmentation strength, which is updated as
follows:

class TemporalConsistencyRegularization:
def __init__(self, memory_size=5, decay_rate=2.0, consistency_weight=0.1):
self.memory_size = memory_size
self.decay_rate = decay_rate
self.consistency_weight = consistency_weight
self.prediction_history = {} # Store past predictions for each sample

$$
S_{g}(x_i) = \alpha \cdot \text{Var}(x_i) + \beta \cdot \text{Entropy}(x_i)
$$

def compute_decay_weights(self):
weights = torch.exp(-torch.arange(1, self.memory_size + 1) / self.decay_rate)
return weights / weights.sum()

2. **Prediction and Temporal Aggregation**: For each batch, the network evaluates
predictions and refines pseudo-labels by aggregating past outputs weighted with the
exponential decay mechanism.

def update_history(self, indices, predictions):
"""Update prediction history for each sample"""
for i, idx in enumerate(indices):
idx = idx.item()
...

3. **Total Loss Optimization**: The total training loss integrates primary classification
loss $\mathcal{L}_{cls}$, consistency regularization $\mathcal{L}_{consistency}$, and
regularized auxiliary losses:
$$
\mathcal{L} = \mathcal{L}_{cls} + \lambda_{consistency} \mathcal{L}_{consistency} +
\lambda_{auxiliary} \mathcal{L}_{auxiliary}
$$

def get_aggregated_predictions(self, indices):
"""
Get aggregated predictions for each sample using decay weights
ỹ_i = Σ(ω_k · ŷ_i^(t-k))
"""
weights = self.compute_decay_weights().to(indices.device)
...

4. **Optimizer Parameters**: We employ SGD with momentum (0.9) and weight decay
($5 \times 10^{-4}$). The step sizes for $\lambda_{consistency}$ and
$\lambda_{auxiliary}$ are determined via grid search over the validation set.

def compute_consistency_loss(self, current_preds, indices):
# Compute consistency loss between current and aggregated past predictions
...

Figure 12: Visual Examples of Auto2DCls Task

Figure 13: N OVEL S EEK software platform includes features such as the user entry interface,
task selection interface, idea-tree visualization and human-computer interaction interface,
code generation, and auto-debug interface. In the near future, we plan to support additional
functionalities, including custom dataset uploads and academic idea thinking modes.

33

