Harnessing AtomisticSkills for Agentic Atomistic Research

arXiv:2605.24002v1 [physics.chem-ph] 18 May 2026

Bowen Deng ,1 Bohan Li ,1, ∗ Matthew Cox ,2, ∗ Hoje Chun ,1, 3 Juno Nam ,1 Artur Lyssenko ,4, 1 Sathya
Edamadaka ,1 Jurgis Ruza ,1 Xiaochen Du ,2 Nofit Segal ,1 Jesus Diaz Sanchez ,5 Mingrou Xie ,2 Ty
Perez ,1 Yu Yao ,6 Miguel Steiner ,1 Sauradeep Majumdar ,1 Charles B. Musgrave III ,1 Anirban Chandra
,7 Abhirup Patra ,8 Detlef Hohl ,7 Connor W. Coley ,2 Ju Li ,1, 6 and Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli 1, †
1
Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
2
Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3
Department of Chemistry, Kookmin University, Seoul 02707, Republic of Korea
4
Harvard University, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA
5
Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
6
Department of Nuclear Science and Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
7
Shell Information Technology International Inc., Texas 77082, United States
8
Shell International Exploration & Production Inc., Texas 77079, United States
(Dated: May 26, 2026)

Computational materials science and chemistry span vast knowledge domains and fractured software ecosystems. Although large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated research capabilities, scaling monolithic agents to manage the rigor and complexity of atomistic research remains
a challenge. Here, we introduce AtomisticSkills, an open-source harness framework that empowers
general-purpose AI coding agents to conduct atomistic research across materials science, chemistry,
and drug discovery. By hierarchically decomposing scientific workflows into agent skills and tools,
AtomisticSkills provides agents with modular, extensible, and plug-and-play research capabilities.
The framework integrates more than 100 human-curated multidisciplinary skills, including database
access, thermodynamics and kinetics modeling, and diverse simulation engines employing machine
learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) and density functional theory (DFT). We validate its functional coverage against scientific literature and demonstrate robust orchestration capabilities across
diverse scientific campaigns: generative design of Li-ion solid-state electrolytes, high-throughput
screening of metal-organic frameworks for CO2 capture, autonomous MLIP benchmarking and finetuning, multi-stage structure-based virtual screening for drug design, multimodal X-ray diffraction
pattern analysis, and screening of Fe-oxide catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction. AtomisticSkills
provides a critical agent infrastructure towards building fully autonomous AI scientists.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The integration of computational workflows is central to modern chemical, materials, and biological research, enabling the efficient screening and design of
novel batteries [1], semiconductors [2], catalysts [3], and
drugs [4]. Despite its profound impact, the execution
of these simulations involves significant operational overhead. Researchers must possess deep domain expertise not only in physics and chemistry but also in navigating fractured software ecosystems: parsing opaque
parameters, handling runtime and convergence errors,
and extracting data from complex, unstructured outputs. To automate these computational procedures,
conventional high-throughput workflow frameworks have
been developed [5–10]. These non-LLM-driven orchestrators are fundamentally hard-coded: while they provide exceptional reliability and reproducibility when executed under expected conditions, they remain nonexpandable and require explicit programmatic definition

∗ These authors contributed equally as co-second authors.
† rafagb@mit.edu

for every new task. Consequently, they are primarily
used for large-scale, systematic materials screening and
deterministic data generation efforts, famously driving
the creation of expansive databases like the Materials
Project [11].
Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and large
language models (LLMs) are reshaping how scientific
workflows are orchestrated, allowing systems to handle
procedural steps that previously required human judgment and to adapt workflows dynamically in response
to intermediate results. Indeed, numerous end-to-end
architectures have emerged to tackle diverse challenges
across different scientific domains. Hardware-integrated
autonomous agents were reported focusing on closing
the loop between digital planning and physical experimentation by orchestrating agentic reasoning, materials
synthesis, and robotic characterizations [12–15]. Moreover, knowledge retrieval and workflow navigation agents
leverage structured databases, multi-disciplinary knowledge, and unbounded web search to dynamically read
documentation, answer complex scientific examinations,
generate hypotheses, and navigate pipelines with reduced hallucination rates [16–19]. In addition, agents
also deployed in silico simulation pipelines with various toolboxes to automate computational tasks, rang-

2

Workﬂow

MCP Tool Box

Is Li₃MCl₆ a good Li-ion conductor?
FairChem

MatGL

Base Server

MACE

I’ll review literature and create a research plan
MCP tool: create_research_dir
MCP tool: search_literature
here is the research plan for you to review:

create
research
search
literature

Atomate2

Smol

Drug

search
chemsys

Tool 1

search
formula

ORCA

DiﬀCSP

visualize
structure

MatterGen

Skill 1

Materials Science(53)
Chemistry(23)

Coding Agents

mat-amorphization

Melting MD

Relaxation

Quenching MD

Convex Hull

Equilibration MD

Energy above hull

research_plan.md

SKILL: ml-foundation-potentials
Analyzed:

SKILL.md
SKILL: general-molecular-dynamics

mat-stability
query MP

Edited:

MCP tool: search_materials_project

General(11)

Supercell Expand

Open

Let’s study Li₃YCl₆, run 300-700K MD
MCP tool: search_literature

Machine Learning(14)

Drug Discovery(18)

Skill 3

Tool 2
Proceed

Skill Library

Skill 2

Ran background command
~/…/AtomisticSkills $ conda run -n matgl-agent python ...

Rules

SKILL: mat-diﬀusion-analysis

Research Standards

Skill Standards

Workflow Standards

MCP environments

FIG. 1. Architecture of AtomisticSkills. The Model Context Protocol (MCP) toolbox provides fundamental research
tools to the agent. Skill library contains mid-level, semi-flexible atomistic research skills that are each constructed with MCP
tools, scripts, markdown files, and examples. Rules define research standards that the agent needs to follow. This hierarchical
research infrastructure can be adopted by any general-purpose coding agent and enable its capability to perform atomistic
research. In this way, complicated and versatile scientific research workflows can be hierarchically decomposed into skills and
tools, and executed by coding agents under the supervision of human researchers.

ing from automated backend package deployment and
multi-agent graph reasoning to orchestrating molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations and first-principles calculations [20–29].
Despite these successes, deploying end-to-end, domainspecific AI agents poses significant infrastructural bottlenecks. Most scientific agents were built as monolithic, standalone platforms atop orchestration frameworks such as LangChain [30]. Consequently, developers of these platforms are forced to reinvent fundamental software infrastructure: engineering system prompts
for individual sub-agents, defining complex inter-agent
communication boundaries, building custom user interfaces, and implementing persistent state tracking. In
comparison to pre-LLM scientific computation management systems [5, 6, 8], these agent platforms are difficult to transfer and deploy across different hardware environments due to additional dependency requirements
on heavy agentic infrastructure and LLM calls. Furthermore, this monolithic design limits agility. It is challenging for end-to-end scientific agents to keep pace with
the fast-evolving ecosystem of general-purpose agents,
such as Claude Code [31], Aider [32], Codex [33], Gemini CLI [34], Cursor [35], Google Antigravity [36], and

Windsurf [37]. These agents rapidly introduce novel LLM
endpoints, refine orchestration graphs, and develop new
standards for persistent memory and long-horizon tasks.
These limitations have motivated a complementary
approach that builds on top of general-purpose coding agents rather than rebuilding their infrastructure:
harness engineering [38]. A harness is the non-model
software infrastructure that wraps an LLM’s reasoning
loop and coordinates tool dispatch, context management,
memory, and safety enforcement. Under the harness engineering approach, frontier coding agents serve as the
substrate, and domain-specific capability is layered on
as modular extensions. Recent work has shown that,
for a fixed model, the choice of agent harness can be
a primary determinant of end-to-end performance, capable of shifting outcomes by margins comparable to
or exceeding model upgrades on agentic coding benchmarks [39, 40]. It is useful to disentangle two layers of
this harness, defined here as the inner harness and outer
harness. The inner harness, built by the agent provider,
is the general-purpose machinery of the agent loop itself: system prompts, context compaction, built-in tool
dispatch, and generic error handling (e.g., Claude Code
or the Claude Agent SDK). The outer harness, built by

3
Materials Science (53)
amorphization

calphad-phase-diagram

dft-electron-phonon
diffusion-analysis

disorder

elasticity

grain-boundary

grand-canonical-mc

magnetic-density

md-monitors

phase-field-non-conservative
reaction-network

calphad-property-diagram

dft-electronic-transport

dft-ferroelectric

electrochemical-window
intercalation-voltage

md-probability-density
pourbaix-diagram

sample-pes-by-md

solid-free-energy

xrd-calculator

ionic-substitution

db-optimade

kinetic-monte-carlo

defect-energy-dft

dielectric-response
equation-of-state

lammps-md

lattice-thermal-conductivity

phase-field-conservative

raman-spectra

structure-novelty

xrd-phase-analysis

defect-energy

dft-vasp

elemental-energies

phase-diagram

qha-thermal-expansion
stability

xrd-digitizer

db-nist-janaf

dft-mixing-functionals

electronic-structure

melting-point

phonon

synthesis-recommendation

db-mp

dft-lobster

random-structure-search

surface-adsorption

surface-energy

xrd-refinement

Chemistry (23)
bond-dissociation

conformer-search

db-mof

dft-orca-singlepoint

docking-void

hazard-toxicity

solution-md

sorption-gcmc

sorption-relax

db-qmof

db-spectra

irc-verification

sorption-widom

dft-orca-advanced-calculation

neb-barrier

thermochemistry

dft-orca-optimization

nmr-analysis

nmr-predict

ts-optimization

vibration

db-chembl

db-pdb

react-ot

similarity-search

Drug Discovery (18)
admet-prediction

binding-site-definition

docking-vina

ligand-prep

retrosynthesis

trajectory-analysis

bioactivity-assay

mmgbsa

molecular-fingerprints

complex-system-builder
pose-validation

protein-ligand-md

db-pubchem

protein-prep

docking-analysis

redocking-rmsd

Machine Learning (14)
cluster-expansion

committee-uncertainty

generative-mattergen

mace-finetune

fairchem-finetune

matgl-finetune

foundation-potentials

generative-adit

generative-diffcsp
property-predict-scd

mlip-automl

mlip-benchmark

mlip-speed

deep-research

patent-search

peer-review

property-predictor

General (11)
arxiv-search
property-units

chemical-literature

chemical-pricing

query-literature-database

plot-digitizer

presentation

workflow-planner

FIG. 2. Skill library in AtomisticSkills. AtomisticSkills provides comprehensive coverage of agentic research skills in
materials science, chemistry, drug discovery, and machine learning. These skills serve as composable research units that can be
built into full research workflows.

the domain user, sits on top and supplies domain-specific
procedural knowledge that informs the agent’s reasoning
before it acts. A highly beneficial way to shape the outer
harness is via the construction of a library of domainspecific agent skills, which were first introduced in this
setting by Anthropic in late 2025 [41]. Skills are procedural documents that facilitate structured and controlled
knowledge injection to the agent’s context without the
heavy pre-indexing required by conventional retrievalaugmented generation (RAG) [42]. This dynamic loading pattern is designed to address two well-documented
LLM failure modes: performance degradation as context length grows [43–46], which persists even in modern
frontier models with million-token windows, and the distractibility induced by irrelevant context even at short
lengths [47]. With agent skills, only a minimal SKILL.md
documentation is loaded into the agent’s context, as opposed to loading full multi-package documentation simultaneously.
The skill convention is very well-suited to the computational sciences, where workflows are typically highly
procedural, environment-dependent, and tightly coupled
to specialized tooling. Researchers can package transferable scientific procedures and toolsets as skill artifacts
that work with any general-purpose coding agent. Each

skill bundles natural-language procedures with actionable scripts and model context protocol (MCP) [48] tools.
The result is robust execution and cross-platform transferability without duplicating core infrastructural functionality like local file management and web search. Several projects have already moved in this direction, building curated modular skill libraries for domain-specific scientific work—among them ToolUniverse [49], Scientific
Agent Skills [50], and MolClaw [51]. However, these efforts are almost exclusively concentrated in bioinformatics and clinical science. An open, systematic, and extensible skill framework dedicated to atomistic materials
science and computational chemistry remains a critical
open challenge.
To bridge this gap, we introduce AtomisticSkills, an
open-source agentic research infrastructure designed for
complex atomistic research. AtomisticSkills targets the
outer harness for atomistic science. In this way, instead
of reinventing the core agent loop itself, it layers atomistic research knowledge on top of any general-purpose
coding agent. A critical challenge in deploying agentic
research lies in resolving the inherent conflict between the
deterministic reliability of traditional automation scripts
and the unbounded, often hallucination-prone flexibility
of free-form coding agents. AtomisticSkills addresses this

4
by grounding unstructured LLM reasoning through a rigorous hierarchical decomposition of scientific knowledge
into workflows, skills, and tools, as shown in Fig. 1.
Workflows represent comprehensive research campaigns targeted at high-level scientific objectives. As
shown in the right panel of Fig. 1, research directives
such as “Is Li3MCl6 a good Li-ion conductor?” are consolidated into modularized research plans by the coding
agent with the aid of AtomisticSkills. Instead of uninformed execution, the agent first hypothesizes solutions,
retrieves pertinent literature, and down-selects an appropriate sequence of skills to formulate a transparent plan.
Following user review and approval, the agent then autonomously orchestrates the prolonged execution campaign.
Skills function as mid-level modular, semi-flexible research tutorials. Rather than standalone executables,
skills consist of sequences of tools designed to solve specific scientific questions. For example, as detailed in the
lower left of Fig. 1, the mat-amorphization skill [52]
consists of a supercell expansion and three MD simulations, each corresponding to an MCP tool call. Similarly, the mat-stability skill involves an MCP-based
database query [11], ionic relaxation, and script-based
construction and analysis of the convex hull phase diagram [53]. Most skills in our library are implemented
based on established methods documented in the literature and are explicitly paired with a markdown manual,
executable scripts, and concrete example usages. To validate their reliability, execution results from these skills
have been compared to literature-reported values whenever available. Additionally, to ensure complete scientific reproducibility, all hyperparameters and arguments
invoked during a skill’s execution are persistently logged
into standardized configuration files alongside the generated outputs.
The current skill library features more than 100 skills,
spanning 53 skills in material science, 23 skills in chemistry, 18 skills in drug discovery, 14 skills in machine
learning, and 11 general research skills. Fig. 2 catalogs
the detailed skill coverages of current AtomisticSkills,
which involve multi-disciplinary database access, simulation methods, machine learning models, experimental
analysis, etc. To our best knowledge, AtomisticSkills
presents the first agent skill infrastructure designed for
general-purpose atomistic research.
Tools constitute low-level, strictly structured operations exposed as Python functions, representing frequent,
reusable fundamental research units that can be picked
off-the-shelf to construct mid-level skills. They feature
rigorous input/output type definitions and facilitate reliable, programmatic calls. Tools live in independent, separately operating environments (MCP servers) to avoid
dependency conflicts. The top left panel of Fig. 1 shows
a list of available MCP servers. In total, we provide
more than 10 tool servers and 50 MCP tools. These include FairChem [54], MatGL [55], and MACE [56], which
provide machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP)

support for simulations; Atomate2 [5], which provides remote simulation management; Smol [57], which provides
lattice thermodynamics analysis; materials and molecular generative models [58, 59], and a drug server that
provides drug discovery tools, etc. In addition to these
universally reusable research tools implemented globally
as MCP servers, AtomisticSkills also provides auxiliary
tool environments that support specific and less reusable
skill scripts that are not configured as persistently exposed MCP tools. Through these individual servers,
the framework executes programmatic operations such as
database retrieval, static energy calculations, and MDs
via local or remote high-performance computing (HPC)
tool calls. Because these tool payloads are strictly typechecked by the MCP protocol, deployed LLMs experience
near-zero hallucination rates when configuring input parameters during these routine procedures. Their foundational reliability is continually guaranteed by unit testing
(pytest).
In addition, rules form the guidelines and constraints
of the agent’s behavior. As shown in the lower center
of Fig. 1, rules establish formal research standards, such
as mandating preliminary literature reviews, enforcing
MLIP registry checks, managing simulation outputs, and
defining the standards to create new tools, skills, and
workflows. These agentic constraints ensure AtomisticSkills executes systematic and reproducible research.
This hierarchical decomposition empowers the agent
to build complex scientific workflows dynamically from
tested skills and tools, without sacrificing the deterministic reliability required for rigorous atomistic research.
By leveraging the built-in code generation and localized
tool-execution capability of general-purpose agents, AI
scientists with AtomisticSkills can autonomously execute
atomistic research workflows, spanning from ad-hoc literature retrieval to programmatic data analysis, while
generating localized, human-readable state artifacts that
permanently ensure step-by-step scientific reproducibility. In the next section, we will show several end-toend case studies demonstrating how the framework seamlessly manages rigorous operational complexity across
computational materials science, chemistry, biology, and
experimental characterization analysis.

II.
A.

RESULTS

AtomisticSkills Coverage in Literature

To benchmark the functional capabilities of AtomisticSkills, we conducted a systematic coverage analysis
by text-mining and randomly sampling 500 papers published in npj Computational Materials. By decomposing
the computational workflows reported in each manuscript
into their constituent skills (see Methods IV C), we systematically compared the literature-used skills against
our library and quantitatively evaluated how effectively
AtomisticSkills supports real-world materials research

5
(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 3. Coverage analysis of AtomisticSkills compared to literature (a) Histogram of the number of skills used in
each paper, text-mined from 500 published research articles from npj Computational Materials. (b) The 30 most frequently
used scientific skills. The histogram indicates their frequency appeared in literature, and the color scheme indicates whether
the skill is covered by AtomisticSkill. (c) Histogram of the skill coverage percentage of AtomisticSkills in each paper. The
result indicates that AtomisticSkills can fully cover around 15% of computational materials journal articles. And on average,
AtomisticSkills covers 56.2% of computational materials skills usage.

demands.
Fig. 3(a) illustrates the number of skills we identified
from each article in npj Computational Materials. The
distribution indicates that typical computational studies rely on fewer than 10 interconnected skills. Crucially,
evaluating these operations against our repository reveals
a notably high degree of functional coverage. Fig. 3(b)
highlights the 30 most frequently used skills found in the
articles. The bar length indicates usage frequency, while
the color denotes whether the literature-mined research
operation is functionally supported by a skill in our library. The result shows that the frequently used skills
in literature are mostly covered by AtomisticSkills. Finally, in Fig. 3(c), we plot the distribution of the percentage skill coverage in the 500 articles, which demonstrates that the framework provides reasonable support
for the vast majority of computational materials science
articles, with an average of 56.2% coverage, and approximately 15% of the evaluated literature reaching 100%
operational mapping. Notably, there are around 12% of

journal articles with 0 coverage. These missing coverages mainly correspond to articles with novel algorithmic developments [60], experimental methods [61], and
special domains that require less frequent computational
skills [62, 63].

Furthermore, to validate the framework’s broader applicability in computational chemistry, we conducted a
similar skill coverage analysis on 500 open-access articles
from The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters. For
computational drug discovery, we collected 500 openaccess articles filtered with keywords from PubMed and
arXiv. The results show that AtomisticSkills have 44.9%
coverage of computational chemistry journal articles and
62.4% coverage of computational drug discovery articles.
These analyses are detailed in Supplementary Figs. S1
and S2.

6
(a)

(b)

(c)

Tool: search_literature (0)
Skill: generative-mattergen (500)
Script: filter-composition (352)
Tool: UMA-relax-structure (352)
Skill: stability (10)
Tool: atomate2-vasp (10)
Skill: stability (9)

Stage1:
Stage2:

UMA
VASP

Skill: electrochemical-window (5)
Tool: fairchem-run-md (5)
Skill: diffusion-analysis (2)
Skill: structure-novelty (2)

UMA-MD

(d)
Composition

LiErCl4

$%&
𝐸!"##
(meV/atom)

0

'()
𝐸!"##
(meV/atom)

0

0

Electrochemical
Window (V)

0.744.31

0.7-3.8

𝐸* (eV)

0.14

0.237

𝜎+& (mS/cm)

63.4

4.5

Li

Er

Cl

LiErBr4
0

Li

Er

Br

Skill: md-probability-density (2)

FIG. 4. Generative design of Li-ion solid state electrolyte. (a) Agentic workflow that involves candidate materials
generation with MatterGen, screening of thermodynamic stability and electrochemical stability with foundation MLIPs and
DFT, and diffusion analysis through MD simulation. The number of candidates after each step is indicated in parentheses. (b)
Distribution of UMA-calculated energy above hull of 352 MatterGen-generated halide-based Li-ion SSE candidates. The inset
plot illustrates how Eh and µ range are determined from constructing a convex hull phase diagram. (c) Arrhenius plot and
extracted room-temperature Li-ion conductivity of two candidate materials from the MD simulation with -s-1p2-omat. (d)
Structures and calculated properties of two top halide Li-ion SSEs.

B.

Generative design of Li-ion solid conductor

Identifying novel superionic solid-state electrolytes
(SSEs) is pivotal to advancing safe, high-energy-density
solid-state batteries. Discovering materials that are simultaneously thermodynamically stable and highly ionically conductive involves exploring a vastly uncharted
chemical space. To address this, we demonstrate an
end-to-end AtomisticSkills agentic workflow to discover
halide-based Li-ion SSEs, illustrated in Fig. 4(a). This
high-throughput computational screening pipeline integrates generative models, foundation MLIPs (FPs), and
DFT. The pool of material candidates is progressively
narrowed after each operational step, with the remaining
subset sizes denoted in parentheses. In Fig. 4(a) and all
subsequent workflow charts, box colors indicate skill categories, consistent with the schema in Fig. 2. For clarity,
category prefixes such as ’ml-’ and ’mat-’ are omitted in
the plots but included in the manuscript.
With the ml-generative-mattergen [58] skill, the
agent first generated 500 hypothetical Li-containing
halide structures across 10 ternary chemical spaces:
Li-Er-Br, Li-Er-Cl, Li-Hf-Cl, Li-In-Br, Li-In-Cl, Li-ScBr, Li-Sc-Cl, Li-Y-Br, Li-Y-Cl, and Li-Zr-Cl. Then,
a composition filter was applied to remove all generated materials that were not charge-neutral according
to common elemental valence states. These candidates

were subsequently filtered using the mat-stability
and mat-electrochemical-window skills, which evaluated thermodynamic stability (Ehull ) [53] and the
intrinsic electrochemical window (ECW) [64] against
UMA-s-1p2-omat [54] and DFT constructed convex hulls.
Specifically, only structures with Ehull = 0 meV atom−1
and ECW < 2 V [64] were retained.
Fig. 4(b) shows the distribution of energies above
the hull (Ehull ) calculated by the UMA-s-1p2-omat [54],
where candidates with lower Ehull are thermodynamically
more stable. The inset schematic plot illustrates how the
Ehull and stable chemical potential (µ) ranges are calculated from the 0 K computational convex hull phase
diagram [53]. The top candidates then underwent MCPtool-triggered multi-temperature MD simulations with
UMA-s-1p2-omat [54] and the mat-diffusion-analysis
skill to extract ionic conductivities and activation barriers. Top candidates were filtered with an extrapolated
room-temperature ionic conductivity < 1 mS cm−1 .
The Arrhenius plot in Fig. 4(c) demonstrates the extraction of activation energy (Ea ) and room-temperature
Li-ion conductivity (σRT ) for the simulated candidates.
The ionically conductive SSE candidate (green) exhibits
lower Ea and higher σRT compared to the poorly conducting SSE candidate (red). Finally, Fig. 4(d) displays
the structural configurations and quantitative properties
of the top two halide Li-ion SSEs discovered in this ex-

7
ploration. Notably, the agent discovered two previously
unreported SSE compounds, LiErCl4 and LiErBr4, which
are thermodynamically stable according to the DFTconstructed convex hull phase diagram and exhibit high
predicted conductivities of 63.4 and 4.5 mS cm−1 with
low activation barriers of 0.14 and 0.237 eV, respectively.
It should be noted that the simulation hyperparameters used in this workflow, such as MD simulation lengths
(∼20 to 100 ps based on early-convergence stopping)
and screening thresholds, were suggested by the agent
and reviewed by human researchers during the research
planning (see Fig. 1) to align with reported SSE highthroughput screening studies [1, 65]. As a result, the simulated conductivities serve strictly as literature-standard
computational screening metrics rather than rigorously
converged values targeted for direct experimental validation. Nevertheless, this abbreviated workflow demonstrates the capacity to construct fully agentic, rigorous
materials discovery pipelines with AtomisticSkills. Ultimately, by seamlessly chaining machine learning algorithms, thermodynamic stability analyses, and advanced
simulation methods, the modularized skill design enables
the potential for fully autonomous materials discovery at
vast scales.

C.

Computational screening of MOF for CO2
capture

Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) exhibit profound
structural and chemical tunability, making them premier candidates for both point-source (industrial flue
gas) and dilute source (Direct Air Capture (DAC)) CO2
capture technologies [66, 67]. While end-to-end agentic MOF pipelines have recently been demonstrated in
literature [24, 68], we demonstrate that similar agentic discovery pipelines can be constructed in AtomisticSkills without explicit predefined orchestration graphs.
Discovering optimal MOFs requires screening massive
structural databases to identify optimal pore geometries and chemical environments that maximize selective gas uptake. To address this MOF screening challenge, the AtomisticSkills agent planned a hierarchical screening workflow shown in Fig. 5(a). It first
deployed the chem-db-mof skill to autonomously retrieve candidate architectures from curated databases,
specifically QMOF [69] and ARC-MOF [70], then used
the chem-sorption-relax and chem-sorption-widom
skills to perform rapid Widom insertions [71] on these
queried frameworks using UMA-s-1p2-odac. The highcapacity candidates were subsequently passed into the
chem-sorption-gcmc skill for rigorous, multi-pressure
grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) isotherm evaluations.
Fig. 5(b) plots the Henry coefficients (KH ) alongside
the CO2 heat of adsorption at infinite-dilution (Qst ) for
ten MOFs queried from the QMOF and ARC-MOF libraries. Here, heuristic filtering thresholds indicative of

thermodynamically viable physisorbents (KH > 10−8
mol kg−1 Pa−1 and Qst < 0 kJ mol−1 ) are used to
identify promising structures for DAC. Subsequently,
Fig. 5(c) shows the GCMC-calculated CO2 adsorption
isotherm for the top candidate qmof-004080b, with
50,000 GCMC steps used at each pressure. The starting point of the isotherm, also known as the Henry’s
regime, represents ultra-dilute atmospheric CO2 relevant
for DAC purposes [72]. In comparison, the 1 bar region
caters more to post-combustion applications, such as flue
gas point-source capture [73].
Notably, the candidate qmof-004080b exhibits a calculated Henry coefficient of 4.64 × 10−5 mol kg−1 Pa−1
(log10 KH ≈ −4.33) and a heat of adsorption (Qst )
of −26.0 kJ mol−1 , hitting the “sweet spot” of modern CO2 physisorbents [74] by balancing robust uptake
with manageable regeneration energy. While its simulated CO2 working capacity of ∼ 3.0 mmol g−1 (1.0–
0.01 bar) demonstrates promising performance for postcombustion capture, the GCMC result at the ultra-dilute
0.0004 bar regime reveals a negligible loading, indicating
qmof-004080b is not ideal for DAC application. This
screening workflow on a small candidate pool demonstrates the capability of AtomisticSkills to bridge structural curation to sorption evaluation. To acquire additional high-fidelity results, the agentic workflow can be
seamlessly extended to assess humidity stability via MD
or adsorption kinetics via DFT.

D.

Agentic MLIP benchmark and fine-tuning

Foundation MLIPs, also known as FPs, have demonstrated broad applicability and generalizability across
chemical spaces [54, 56, 75–80]. However, they can suffer
from degraded accuracy when extrapolating to out-ofdistribution atomistic configurations, such as those encountered during high-temperature MD [81, 82]. To ensure their reliability, systematic benchmarking [83] and
data-efficient fine-tuning are often required [84]. However, divergent syntaxes, incompatible data pipeline formats, and conflicting environment dependencies across
MLIP architectures pose a technical barrier for practitioners. These challenges motivate agentic orchestrations
of complex machine learning workflows entirely via natural language [85].
In this section, we showcase a fully agentic MLIP
benchmarking and fine-tuning workflow focused on the
superionic SSE Li10GeP2S12 [86].
Fig. 5(d) illustrates this automated machine learning (AutoML) cycle. The agent initially sampled 200 structures from the
Li10GeP2S12 potential energy surface (PES) by utilizing
the mat-sample-pes-by-md skill [84]. Subsequently, remote HPC-DFT jobs with MatPES-VASP settings [79]
were submitted via the atomate2-vasp MCP tool to acquire high-fidelity energy and force labels for the sampled structures. The ml-foundation-potentials skill
guided the agent to identify the most relevant FPs for the

8
(a)

(b)

(c)

Skill: db-mof
Skill: sorption-relax
Skill: sorption-widom
Skill: sorption-gcmc

(d)

(e)

(f)

Skill: sample-pes-by-md
Tool: atomate2-vasp
Skill: foundation-potentials
Skill: mlip-benchmark
Skill: mace-finetune

MatGL

MACE

Fairchem

FIG. 5. Agentic screening of MOFs and MLIP AutoML workflows. (a) Agentic computational screening workflow for
MOF-based CO2 capture. (b) Calculated Henry coefficient and CO2 heat of adsorption at 298 K, for 10 MOF candidates queried
from QMOF and ARC-MOF databases. (c) CO2 adsorption isotherm calculated at 298 K via GCMC simulation leveraging
UMA-s-1p2-odac. (d) Agentic MLIP workflow composed of automatic sampling of potential energy surface, DFT calculations
on remote HPC, selection of FPs, benchmarking, and fine-tuning. (e) Parity plot and force MAE for 4 FPs compared to DFT
ground-truth labels on the Li10GeP2S12 dataset. (f ) Agentic fine-tuning MAE history of MACE-OMAT-0-small on the sampled
dataset.

Li10GeP2S12 system, which was followed by the execution
of the ml-mlip-benchmark skill. Here, the agent benchmarked the energy and force prediction accuracy of four
selected FPs: TensorNet [55], CHGNet [78], MACE [56],
and UMA [54]. The resulting force parity plots and force
mean absolute errors (MAEs) are shown in Fig. 5(e).
AtomisticSkills further facilitated the agentic fine-tuning
of these models. Following the instructions provided
by the ml-mace-finetune skill, the agent autonomously
fine-tuned the MACE-OMAT-0-small architecture using
the prepared structures and labels. Fig. 5(f) charts the
energy and force validation MAE history during this
agent-triggered fine-tuning, demonstrating a gradual decrease in validation MAEs over a brief 30-epoch training
run.

These findings demonstrate that atomistic ML models,
such as FPs, can be efficiently benchmarked and finetuned using the AtomisticSkills framework. Through the
autonomous management of training data preparation,
remote HPC job submission, and complex machine learning pipelines, AtomisticSkills significantly reduces the
learning curve and operational complexity of advanced
scientific computing infrastructures.

E.

Structure-based high-throughput virtual
screening for drug discovery

Structure-based virtual screening (SBVS) is commonly
used to prioritize small molecules against a protein target before experimental assay [87, 88], and in practice, each campaign requires an expert to orchestrate a
chain of specialized tools (receptor preparation, docking,
scoring, pose refinement) with judgment calls at every
stage that make simple, deterministic automation difficult [89]. We tested whether an AI agent using AtomisticSkills can drive this workflow autonomously by running
the DUD-E CDK2 benchmark (474 actives and 27,850
property-matched decoys) [90] end-to-end. From a single
user prompt, the agent retrieved the holo CDK2 structure (PDB: 1H1S [91, 92]) using drug-db-pdb, repaired
and protonated the receptor with drug-protein-prep,
and defined the docking box from the co-crystal ligand via drug-binding-site-definition. It then generated 3D conformers and AutoDock-readable PDBQT
files for the full library with drug-ligand-prep (RDKit ETKDG [93] / MMFF94 [4] / Meeko [94]), ran
AutoDock Vina [95] at exhaustiveness 32 through
drug-docking-vina, and combined the resulting affinities into a ranked hit list. To determine whether

9
(b)

(c)

Skill: db-pdb

(d) 


Skill: protein-prep

Validation Gate
(Redocking)

Skill: ligand-prep

Skill: docking-vina

(e)
 
  

 



Skill: binding-site-definition

Docking

Target Retrieval
and Preparation

(a)





Skill: docking-vina



Skill: redocking-rmsd

(f)




 

        

(g)

Skill: docking-analysis
Skill: pose-validation

Post-Docking
Refinement

Skill: ligand-prep
Skill: complex-system-builder
Skill: protein-ligand-md
Skill: trajectory-analysis
Skill: mmgbsa

FIG. 6. Agentic high-throughput virtual screening for drug discovery (a) Computational docking pipeline as executed
by the agent on the DUD-E CDK2 benchmark, separated into four main stages: target retrieval and preparation, redocking
known actives for docking protocol validation, the primary docking run, and post-docking refinement. (b) Prepared CDK2
receptor (PDB: 1H1S) with autodefined docking box (drug-binding-site-definition) around the ATP-binding site; co-crystal
ligand shown in orange. (c) Top-ranked Vina pose for the rank-1 active CHEMBL104526 in the CDK2 ATP-binding site. (d)
Best-pose Vina docking-score distributions for the 474 known actives (blue) and 25,606 decoys (red) of the DUD-E CDK2
library, shown as kernel density estimates overlaid on normalized histograms. (e) ROC curve for Vina-based active/decoy
classification on the DUD-E CDK2 benchmark (AUC = 0.70). Ligand heavy-atom RMSD over 5 ns of explicit-water MD after
protein-Cα alignment for four strong-Vina actives (ranks 1, 2, 3, 5; blue) and four weak-Vina decoys (ranks 20,000, 22,413,
24,022, 25,629; red). Each trace is the mean across four independent replicates with different integrator seeds, with a 110
ps centered rolling mean applied for visual smoothing. Marker shape identifies the compound and is shared with panel (g).
(g) Per-replicate single-trajectory MM-GBSA binding free energy (∆Gbind ; GBn2 implicit solvent, no entropy correction) for
the same eight compounds, with mean ± 1 s.d. error bars across the four MD replicates; stronger binding is plotted upward.
Marker shape matches panel (f). The replicate means show clear class separation (active mean −42.9 ± 3.6 vs. decoy mean
−29.7 ± 5.7 kcal mol−1 ; Welch’s t-test p = 0.011).

the docked poses remain stable under explicit-solvent
MDs, the agent built parameterized protein-ligand systems with drug-complex-system-builder (OpenFF
Sage 2.2.0 [96] + Amber ff14SB [97] + TIP3P [98]),
ran 5 ns of explicit-water MD per compound via
drug-protein-ligand-md (OpenMM [99], using a 4
fs time step enabled by hydrogen mass repartitioning [100]), computed ligand heavy-atom RMSD trajectories with drug-trajectory-analysis, and estimated
relative binding free energies with single-trajectory
MM-GBSA [101] in GBn2 implicit solvent [102] via
drug-mmgbsa.
The screen is summarized in Fig. 6. Panel (a) shows
the skill-call sequence executed by the agent. Panel (b)
shows the prepared receptor with the autodefined docking box, and panel (c) shows the top-ranked docked pose
in the CDK2 ATP-binding site. Panel (d) shows the
Vina score distributions for the 474 actives and 25,606
decoys separately, where the actives’ density is shifted

toward stronger predicted binding by ∼1 kcal mol−1 but
with substantial overlap, the visual basis for the AUC
= 0.70 in panel (e). Panel (e) shows the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and reports two standard SBVS metrics. The area under the curve (AUC) is
the probability that a randomly drawn active is ranked
above a randomly drawn decoy, where 0.5 corresponds to
random ranking and 1.0 to perfect; here, AUC = 0.70.
The enrichment factor at the top 1% of the ranked list
(EF1%) is the fold-enrichment of actives in the top 1%
relative to the population active rate; here, EF1% = 7.0.
Both values fall within the range typically reported for
Vina on DUD-E targets [103]. To probe pose stability
across the Vina ranking, the agent ran four independent
5 ns explicit-water MD replicates for each of four strongVina actives (ranks 1, 2, 3, 5) and four weak-Vina decoys (ranks 20,000, 22,413, 24,022, 25,629). Panel (f)
shows the replicate-mean ligand heavy-atom RMSD: the
actives all stabilize below 0.5 Å, while the decoys spread

10
between 0.5 and 1.4 Åwith one (C03359783) drifting upward over the trajectory. The MD step thus contributes
pose-stability information that is not present in the docking score alone. Panel (g) shows the per-replicate MMGBSA binding free energy (∆Gbind ) for the same eight
compounds, with each compound’s four replicate means
displayed individually and error bars showing ±1 s.d.
across replicates. The class means are well-separated (actives −42.9±3.6 vs decoys −29.7±5.7 kcal mol−1 ; Welch’s
t-test p = 0.011), thereby corroborating the RMSD-based
pose-stability analysis with an independent energetic signal.
These results show how AtomisticSkills can autonomously drive a complete SBVS funnel, going from
a raw PDB file to ranked hits with downstream stability filtering, which was able to successfully separate actives from decoys at a statistically significant level. The
AUC and early-enrichment values are consistent with
the published Vina literature, and the rank-stratified
RMSD/MM-GBSA result demonstrates that the agent
can compose multiple skills to complete post-docking refinement and ranking procedure from structural and energetic signals.

F.

Multimodal analysis of XRD patterns

In contrast to highly standardized simulation outputs,
the automated analysis of experimental characterization
data presents a profound challenge for both human researchers and emerging AI scientists. This bottleneck
is primarily driven by two factors: first, raw data formats are often dictated by proprietary characterization
hardware and differ substantially between facilities; second, existing data within the broader literature is frequently presented in un-digitized figures rather than raw
numerical arrays. Extracting actionable representations
from these graphical data is a critical challenge in datadriven analysis. Overcoming this requires a truly multimodal approach capable of transforming unstructured visual data into machine-readable numerical arrays. While
most agentic scientific frameworks restrict their operational scope to purely textual environments, AtomisticSkills natively integrates multimodal capabilities through
its integration in general-purpose agents. This enables
assimilation of the diverse, non-standardized visual data
formats that are inherent to scientific research.
To demonstrate this, we used AtomisticSkills to analyze an X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD) reported in
a recent study [105]. Fig. 7(a) shows the complete
workflow. We began by sending the AtomisticSkills
agent a screenshot of Fig. 2 from Turayev [105], which
provides an experimental XRD profile of the authorsynthesized orthorhombic YBa2 Cu3 O7−δ (YBCO-123)
high-temperature superconductor. AtomisticSkills agent
used the mat-xrd-digitizer skill, invoking integral
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to process the screenshot and digitize localized 2θ peak intensities into a nu-

merical array xrd.xy. The agent then translated this
array into the data-driven automated Rietveld analysis
(Dara) [106] by routing the extracted arrays through the
mat-xrd-phase-analysis in the Y-Ba-Cu-O chemical
space, which autonomously and correctly identified the
YBa2 Cu3 O7−δ structure as the globally dominant crystalline phase.
Armed with this compositional hypothesis, the agent
routed the data to the mat-xrd-refinement skill to
perform a multiphase Rietveld refinement encompassing
the primary YBa2 Cu3 O7−δ phase alongside secondary
phases Y2BaCuO5, CuO, and BaCuO2. Fig. 7(b) displays the agent-digitized XRD refinement plot, together
with the Dara-calculated contributions from the multiphase mixture and their corresponding weight fraction
in the legend. Notably, these results aligned with the reported impurity phases in Turayev [105], which suggested
Y2BaCuO5 is a common impurity from the incomplete
solid-state synthesis of YBCO-123, and CuO BaCuO2
present as unreacted leftover precursors.
Finally, in Fig. 7(c), we demonstrate the usage of the
mat-synthesis-recommendation skill [107–109] to retrieve laboratory synthesis pathways for the identified
target phase YBCO-123. This end-to-end orchestration exemplifies how AtomisticSkills seamlessly transitions between vision, numerical physical simulation, and
natural language, transcending the text-only limitations
of traditional agentic systems.
The alignment between the literature-reported phase
identification and our agentic refinement analysis highlights the potential of VLM-assisted multimodality. By
interpreting unstructured, heterogeneous visual data and
bridging it with rigorous characterization analysis, AtomisticSkills reduced the barrier to studying and reproducing experimental data. This agentic translation of static
images into vectorized experimental data and synthesis
recipes highlights the expanding multi-modal capabilities
of agentic scientific discovery.

G.

Screening of Fe-oxide for oxygen evolution
reaction

The development of Earth-abundant catalysts for the
oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is critical for electrochemical water splitting. Here, we demonstrate the autonomous screening of the iron oxide chemical space
across diverse stoichiometries and Miller indices using AtomisticSkills. Crucially, this workflow serves to
demonstrate the integration of AtomisticSkills with private scientific software. Specifically, we use an in-house
computational pipeline, htvs, which supports the surface
screening protocol and remote HPC job submission and
asynchronous job handling on the MIT HPC cluster [110].
The workflow is shown in Fig. 7(d). It started
with the mat-db-mp skill, which queried the Materials Project database to identify 15 thermodynamically
stable (Ehull < 0.05 eV atom−1 ), magnetically ordered

11
(b)

(a)

(c)
## Precursors
- BaCO₃, CuO, Y₂O₃

Skill: xrd-digitizer
xrd.xy

Rwp
Skill: xrd-refinement

## Steps
1.Ground: 45.0 min
3.Fired: 900.0 °C for 24.0 h
4.Reground: 45.0 min
5.Sintered: 900.0 °C for 24.0 h
6.Ground and repressed
7.Fired: 900.0 °C for 24.0 h
8.Oxygen annealed: 550.0 °C

intensity

Skill: xrd-phase-analysis

Skill: synthesisrecommendation

(d)

(e)

2𝛉

(f)

Skill: db-mp
Skill: htvs-cutcleansurface
Skill: htvs-autopilot

Skill: htvs-mlip-relax

Fe
O
H

Skill: htvs-addadsorbate
Skill: htvs-catalysisactivity-analysis

Skill: htvs-mlip-relax

FIG. 7. Agentic Analysis of XRD spectrum and screening of catalytic surfaces. (a) AtomisticSkills workflow
for analyzing experimental XRD spectrum. The user first sends a screenshot of an XRD pattern from an experimental
characterization journal article to the agent. The xrd-digitizer skill then invokes the vision language model backend to
digitize the screenshot into curve data, and passes the data into xrd-phase-analysis and xrd-refinement skills. Finally,
synthesis-recommendation skill is called to propose a synthesis recipe for the target material. (b) The agentic XRD refinement
result shows material compositions matching literature results. (c) Synthesis recommendation with precursors and synthesis
steps. (d) Agentic workflow for screening Fe-oxide surfaces for oxygen evolution reaction (OER) with htvs remote job manager.
(e) Representative atomic configuration of OH* on Fe3O4 (100) surface with Materials Project id mp-19306. (f ) Volcano plot
of MLIP prediction illustrating the OER overpotential as a function of the binding energy descriptor ∆GO∗ − ∆GOH∗ , with
colored markers denoting distinct bulk polymorphs. The black dashed lines represent the empirical fit of the sampled data,
while the grey dashed lines represent the universal theoretical limits [104].

Fe–O bulk polymorphs. These structures were subsequently processed by the mat-htvs-cutcleansurface
skill, performing symmetry-aware cleavage to generate
a library of 80 unique low-Miller index (100), (110),
and (111) pristine surface terminations. To resolve
the computational bottlenecks in local simulations, the
agent is incorporated with a remote simulation management skill in mat-htvs-autopilot. This autopilot skill can orchestrate DFT and MLIP-based calculations through sub-skills such as mat-htvs-mlip-relax
and mat-htvs-vasp. Specifically, the orchestrator uses
a priority sub-queue daemon to manage asynchronous
UMA-s-1p2-omat [54] jobs and data streams and promotes promising candidates to the next stage of evaluation without awaiting the completion of the entire
pristine surface batch. Following surface stabilization,
the mat-htvs-addadsorbate skill was deployed to identify optimal coordination sites and place O*, OH*, and
OOH* reaction intermediates. An example atomic configuration of the mp-19306 (100) facet with identified reaction site is illustrated in Fig. 7(e).
The resulting MLIP-predicted energetics were final-

ized by the mat-htvs-catalysis-activity-analysis
skill to construct the four-step OER free energy profiles and the final activity volcano plot (Fig. 7(f)). The
promising candidates approaching the theoretical overpotential limit of 0.37 V [104, 111], such as the (100)
facet of mp-19306 with the overpotential value of 0.428
V. This demonstrates the versatile extendability of the
framework with the users’ private scientific software and
skills, leveraging asynchronous HPC job orchestration to
enable electrocatalyst discovery at scale.

III.

DISCUSSION

Scientific discovery is inherently exploratory. As a result, the balance between exploiting curated standards
and exploring novel methodologies is critical to achieving reliable and novel results. In AtomisticSkills, we
propose an agentic harness infrastructure to construct
end-to-end reliable scientific workflows through combining modularized skills and tools. As a result, creative
workflows can be designed without sacrificing scientific

12
rigor, which would otherwise pose a great challenge
given the hallucination tendency of LLMs in complicated tasks. The decomposable framework of AtomisticSkills also makes an ideal sandbox for building workflow
prototypes and deployable pipelines. For example, mature text-based workflows can be documented as semiprogrammatic skills, and frequently used skills can be
hardened into deterministic, programmatic tools. This
provides the agent with freedom to test hypotheses and
create prototypes, while being able to distill emergent
problem-solving patterns back into formal, reproducible
research pipelines.
The development of AtomisticSkills illuminates several critical trajectories for the future of agentic materials computation. Currently, the framework’s operational paradigm functions predominantly in a “co-pilot”
modality, where human researchers provide high-level directives, supervise the autonomous orchestration of tool
usage, and intervene to validate complex experimental
runs. Importantly, this modality is not an intrinsic limitation of AtomisticSkills itself, but rather reflects the
current state of general-purpose coding agents, which are
primarily optimized and restricted to short-horizon tasks.
Our experience demonstrates that human supervision remains critical to guide the agent through complex, multiday scientific workflows. However, rapid advancements
in long-running agent capabilities are continuously improving their capacity for sustained, autonomous execution [112, 113]. This evolving research frontier precisely
motivates our initial design philosophy: rather than engineering an end-to-end research agent from scratch, we
have built a modular research infrastructure that can
evolve with general-purpose agents. As underlying agentic frameworks become increasingly capable of long-time
execution, AtomisticSkills can seamlessly adapt these capabilities to perform fully self-driving, closed-loop discovery and ultimately drive towards AI scientists.
Another critical challenge in scientific agentic harness
engineering lies in the full transition into cloud-based scientific computing. While AtomisticSkills natively embeds remote HPC job managers like Atomate2 [5] and
htvs, many conventional scientific tools were initially
designed and bottlenecked by local compute. Migrating the entire scientific compute infrastructure to cloudbased endpoints requires redesigning agentic job management systems as well as dedicated hardware efforts.
We believe this is an essential next step to scale highperformance scientific computing to the vast reasoning
capability of LLM agents.
Beyond advancing the underlying execution infrastructure, there is immense potential in combining AtomisticSkills with high-level research agents designed to
autonomously generate hypotheses [21] and dynamically evolve their own scientific objective functions [114].
Because these reasoning-focused agents often lack the
domain-specific execution pathways required to computationally verify their proposed candidates, AtomisticSkills provides the critical execution scaffold needed to

rigorously explore, simulate, and experimentally validate
their abstract scientific reasoning.
As the first public atomistic skill repository, AtomisticSkills provides the necessary scaffolding for the community to continually expand scientific skills through
manual human curation, literature text-mining, and automated agentic skill acquisition [115], such as collective skill evolution [116] or on-the-fly tool generation [117, 118]. While these sophisticated frameworks
demonstrate that agents can successfully self-evolve functional skills, recent benchmarks caution that naive, unguided automated skill generation [119] and unstructured tool retrieval [120] often fail to outperform carefully human-authored procedural knowledge. As a result, effective automated skill acquisition still requires a
robust baseline of domain expertise, thereby highlighting
the critical value of the human-curated and thoroughly
tested skill library released in AtomisticSkills. Furthermore, with only limited benchmarks for scientific agents
currently available [121], the evaluation of autonomous
research, especially for complex atomistic simulations, remains an open challenge. AtomisticSkills offers an opportunity to benchmark scientific agents and autonomous
skill acquisition by providing a benchmarking baseline
with its documented skill outputs, workflows, and reasoning traces.

IV.
A.

METHODS

Integration into General-Purpose Coding
Agents

AtomisticSkills is designed as a modular extension that
can be added to general-purpose AI coding agents, such
as Google Antigravity, Claude Code, Cursor, OpenClaw,
Gemini CLI, etc. This integration is realized by including
the text description of tools, skills, and rules in the LLM’s
system prompt and providing executables to the agent.
These incorporations of tools and skills are a standard
procedure in all modern coding agents. We demonstrate
the example user interface of AtomisticSkills in Google
Antigravity [36] and OpenClaw in Supplementary Fig.
S3 and S4.

B.

Simulation Infrastructure

AtomisticSkills integrates all the FP checkpoints under MACE [56], FairChem [54], and MatGL [55] libraries.
Target property prediction, PES inference, and AutoML
pipelines were standardized using the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) [122], pymatgen [123], and RDKit [124] to enable unified tool invocation by the LLM
agents. The DFT mentioned in this manuscript is calculated by VASP [125] with Atomate2 [5], in compatible settings with Materials Project [11] and MatPES
dataset [79].

13
C.

Literature Mining and Skill Identification

Coverage analysis of the AtomisticSkills framework
was performed by text-mining a corpus of scientific literature to identify the distribution of used simulations, characterization techniques, and workflows. Specifically, for
the materials science benchmark, the underlying computational skills used in each of the 500 npj Computational
Materials articles were systematically extracted, defined,
and categorized by an external LLM instructed to distill
its skills.
To automate skill identification, we started by defining the granularity and skill boundary with a set of predefined skills (e.g., dft-mlip-structure-relaxation,
dft-electronic-structure-calculation) that are independent of AtomisticSkills. Then, each downloaded
journal article was decomposed using GPT-5.4-mini into
this predefined skill set and newly proposed skills. In this
way, around 8 skills were collected on average from each
of the 500 npj Computational Materials articles, as shown
in Fig. 3(a). These independently collected skills were
further deduplicated and merged by LLMs and reviewed
by human experts, which resulted in a set of 95 proposed
new skills, such as those shown in Fig. 3(b). Finally, we
re-decompose the 500 articles by using this cleaned set
of skills that combines predefined and newly proposed
skills. AtomisticSkills’ coverage of each re-decomposed
skill is then determined by GPT-5.4-mini and reviewed
by human experts. The resulting percentage skill coverage was plotted in Fig. 3(c).

V.

CODE AVAILABILITY

The source code of AtomisticSkills is available at http
s://github.com/learningmatter-mit/AtomisticSk
ills.
VI.

support from the Mathworks Fellowship. S.M. is supported by the Postdoctoral Mobility Fellowship from the
Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), grant number P500PN 222184. M.S. gratefully acknowledges the
Postdoctoral Mobility fellowship P500PN 225736 from
the SNSF. J.R. and S.E. would like to acknowledge the
funding support of the SK Telecom-MIT Generative AI
Impact Consortium (MGAIC) grant. N.S. acknowledges
support from the Eli and Dorothy Berman Fellowship.
M.X. acknowledges funding support from the Agency
for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR). T.P.
and J.D.S. acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program
(NSF-GRFP). A.L. and X.D. acknowledge funding from
Amazon as part of the MIT Climate and Sustainability Consortium (MCSC). C.B.M. was supported by the
Energy Storage Research Alliance (ESRA, DE-AC0206CH11357), an Energy Innovation Hub funded by the
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences.

VII.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

B.D. and R.G.-B. conceived the project. B.D. developed the AtomisticSkills architecture, integrated the
MCP servers, skill library, workflows, and led the
manuscript drafting. B.L. contributed to the skill coverage analysis. M.C. contributed the drug-discovery workflow and skills. H.C. contributed to the htvs-based catalysis workflow and skills. J.N., A.L., H.C., S.E., J.R.,
X.D., N.S., J.D.S., M.X., T.P., Y.Y., M.S., S.M., and
C.B.M. contributed to other atomistic skills, computational workflows, and integration testing. A.C., A.P.,
D.H., C.W.C., J.L., and R.G.-B. provided supervision
and strategic guidance. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the scientific narrative of the
manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
VIII.

B.D., B.L., M.C., and Y.Y would like to acknowledge
the funding support by Shell Inc. J.N. acknowledges

[1] K. Jun, Y. Sun, Y. Xiao, Y. Zeng, R. Kim, H. Kim,
L. J. Miara, D. Im, Y. Wang, and G. Ceder, Lithium
superionic conductors with corner-sharing frameworks,
Nature Materials 21, 924–931 (2022).
[2] C. G. V. d. Walle and J. Neugebauer, First-principles
calculations for defects and impurities: Applications to
iii-nitrides, Journal of Applied Physics 95, 3851–3879
(2004).
[3] B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang,
Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li, and T. Zhang, Single-atom catalysis of co oxidation using pt1/feox, Nature Chemistry 3,
634–641 (2011).

COMPETING INTERESTS

R.G.-B. is Chief Scientific Officer at Lila Sciences.

[4] T. A. Halgren, Merck molecular force field. I. Basis, form, scope, parameterization, and performance of
MMFF94, Journal of Computational Chemistry 17, 490
(1996).
[5] A. M. Ganose, H. Sahasrabuddhe, M. Asta, K. Beck,
T. Biswas, A. Bonkowski, J. Bustamante, X. Chen,
Y. Chiang, D. C. Chrzan, J. Clary, O. A. Cohen, C. Ertural, M. C. Gallant, J. George, S. Gerits, R. E. A.
Goodall, R. D. Guha, G. Hautier, M. Horton, T. J.
Inizan, A. D. Kaplan, R. S. Kingsbury, M. C. Kuner,
B. Li, X. Linn, M. J. McDermott, R. S. Mohanakrishnan, A. N. Naik, J. B. Neaton, S. M. Parmar, K. A.

14
Persson, G. Petretto, T. A. R. Purcell, F. Ricci, B. Rich,
J. Riebesell, G.-M. Rignanese, A. S. Rosen, M. Scheffler, J. Schmidt, J.-X. Shen, A. Sobolev, R. Sundararaman, C. Tezak, V. Trinquet, J. B. Varley, D. VigilFowler, D. Wang, D. Waroquiers, M. Wen, H. Yang,
H. Zheng, J. Zheng, Z. Zhu, and A. Jain, Atomate2:
modular workflows for materials science, Digital Discovery 4, 1944–1973 (2025).
[6] S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, G. L. Hart, M. Jahnatek,
R. V. Chepulskii, R. H. Taylor, S. Wang, J. Xue,
K. Yang, O. Levy, M. J. Mehl, H. T. Stokes, D. O. Demchenko, and D. Morgan, Aflow: An automatic framework for high-throughput materials discovery, Computational Materials Science 58, 218–226 (2012).
[7] M. Uhrin, S. P. Huber, J. Yu, N. Marzari, and G. Pizzi,
Workflows in AiiDA: Engineering a high-throughput,
event-based engine for robust and modular computational workflows, Computational Materials Science 187,
110086 (2021).
[8] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, W. Chen, B. Medasani, X. Qu,
M. Kocher, M. Brafman, G. Petretto, G.-M. Rignanese,
G. Hautier, D. Gunter, and K. A. Persson, FireWorks: a
dynamic workflow system designed for high-throughput
applications, Concurrency and Computation: Practice
and Experience 27, 5037 (2015).
[9] G. Wang, L. Peng, K. Li, L. Zhu, J. Zhou, N. Miao,
and Z. Sun, ALKEMIE: An intelligent computational
platform for accelerating materials discovery and design,
Computational Materials Science 186, 110064 (2021).
[10] T. Weymuth, J. P. Unsleber, P. L. Türtscher,
M. Steiner, J.-G. Sobez, C. H. Müller, M. Mörchen,
V. Klasovita, S. A. Grimmel, M. Eckhoff, K.-S. Csizi,
F. Bosia, M. Bensberg, and M. Reiher, SCINE—
Software for chemical interaction networks, J. Chem.
Phys. 160 (2024).
[11] M. K. Horton, P. Huck, R. X. Yang, J. M. Munro,
S. Dwaraknath, A. M. Ganose, R. S. Kingsbury,
M. Wen, J. X. Shen, T. S. Mathis, A. D. Kaplan,
K. Berket, J. Riebesell, J. George, A. S. Rosen,
E. W. C. Spotte-Smith, M. J. McDermott, O. A. Cohen, A. Dunn, M. C. Kuner, G.-M. Rignanese, G. Petretto, D. Waroquiers, S. M. Griffin, J. B. Neaton, D. C.
Chrzan, M. Asta, G. Hautier, S. Cholia, G. Ceder, S. P.
Ong, A. Jain, and K. A. Persson, Accelerated datadriven materials science with the materials project, Nature Materials , 1–11 (2025).
[12] D. A. Boiko, R. MacKnight, B. Kline, and G. Gomes,
Autonomous chemical research with large language
models, Nature 624, 570–578 (2023).
[13] T. Song, M. Luo, X. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Cao,
Q. Zhu, D. Liu, B. Zhang, G. Zou, G. Zhang, F. Zhang,
W. Shang, Y. Fu, J. Jiang, and Y. Luo, A multiagentdriven robotic ai chemist enabling autonomous chemical
research on demand, Journal of the American Chemical
Society 147, 12534–12545 (2025).
[14] Y. Fei, B. Rendy, X. Yang, J. Woo, X. Huang, C. Li,
S. Wang, D. Milsted, Y. Zeng, and G. Ceder, Agentic llm
reasoning in a self-driving laboratory for air-sensitive
lithium halide spinel conductors, arXiv (2026).
[15] Z. Zhang, Z. Ren, C.-W. Hsu, W. Chen, Z.-W. Hong, C.F. Lee, A. Penn, H. Xu, D. J. Zheng, S. Miao, Y. Huang,
Y. Gao, W. Chen, H. Smith, Y. Niu, Y. Tian, Y.-R. Lu,
Y.-C. Shao, S. Li, H.-T. Wang, I. I. Abate, P. Agrawal,
Y. Shao-Horn, and J. Li, A multimodal robotic platform

for multi-element electrocatalyst discovery, Nature , 1–3
(2025).
[16] Y. Chiang, E. Hsieh, C.-H. Chou, and J. Riebesell,
Llamp: Large language model made powerful for highfidelity materials knowledge retrieval, Proceedings of
the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , 25200–25232 (2025).
[17] Y. Zou, A. H. Cheng, A. Aldossary, J. Bai, S. X. Leong,
J. A. Campos-Gonzalez-Angulo, C. Choi, C. T. Ser,
G. Tom, A. Wang, Z. Zhang, I. Yakavets, H. Hao,
C. Crebolder, V. Bernales, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, El
agente: An autonomous agent for quantum chemistry,
Matter 8, 102263 (2025).
[18] I. Gustin, L. M. Calderón, J. B. Pérez-Sánchez, J. F.
Gonthier, Y. Nakamura, K. Panicker, M. Ramprasad,
Z. Zhang, Y. Zou, V. Bernales, and A. Aspuru-Guzik,
El agente cuántico: Automating quantum simulations,
arXiv (2025).
[19] T. Marwitz, A. Colsmann, B. Breitung, C. Brabec,
C. Kirchlechner, E. Blasco, G. C. Marques, H. Hahn,
M. Hirtz, P. A. Levkin, Y. M. Eggeler, T. Schlöder, and
P. Friederich, Predicting new research directions in materials science using large language models and concept
graphs, Nature Machine Intelligence , 1–10 (2026).
[20] A. M. Bran, S. Cox, O. Schilter, C. Baldassari, A. D.
White, and P. Schwaller, Augmenting large language
models with chemistry tools, Nature Machine Intelligence 6, 525–535 (2024).
[21] A. Ghafarollahi and M. J. Buehler, Sciagents: Automating scientific discovery through bioinspired multiagent intelligent graph reasoning, Advanced Materials
37, 2413523 (2025).
[22] J. Hu, H. Nawaz, Y.-F. Hou, Y. Rui, L. Chi, Y. Chen,
A. Ullah, and P. O. Dral, Aitomia: Your intelligent assistant for ai-driven atomistic and quantum chemical
simulations, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08195 (2025).
[23] L. Mitchener, A. Yiu, B. Chang, M. Bourdenx,
T. Nadolski, A. Sulovari, E. C. Landsness, D. L.
Barabasi, S. Narayanan, N. Evans, S. Reddy, M. Foiani,
A. Kamal, L. P. Shriver, F. Cao, A. T. Wassie, J. M.
Laurent, E. Melville-Green, M. Caldas, A. Bou, K. F.
Roberts, S. Zagorac, T. C. Orr, M. E. Orr, K. J.
Zwezdaryk, A. E. Ghareeb, L. McCoy, B. Gomes, E. A.
Ashley, K. E. Duff, T. Buonassisi, T. Rainforth, R. J.
Bateman, M. Skarlinski, S. G. Rodriques, M. M. Hinks,
and A. D. White, Kosmos: An ai scientist for autonomous discovery, arXiv (2025).
[24] Z. Zheng, N. Rampal, T. J. Inizan, C. Borgs, J. T.
Chayes, and O. M. Yaghi, Large language models
for reticular chemistry, Nature Reviews Materials 10,
369–381 (2025).
[25] Y. Wang, Z. Huang, Z. Ding, R. Liao, Y. Huang, X. Liu,
J. Xie, S. Chen, and L. Zhang, Deploy-master: Automating the deployment of 50,000+ agent-ready scientific tools in one day, arXiv (2026).
[26] L. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Cai, J. Chai, J. Chang, K. Chen,
Z. X. Chen, Z. Ding, Y. Du, Y. Gao, Y. Gao, J. Gao,
Z. Gao, Q. Gu, Y. Hong, Y. Huang, X. Fang, X. Ji,
G. Ke, Z. Lei, X. Li, Y. Li, R. Liao, H. Lin, X. Lin,
Y. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Lu, T. Miao, H. Que, W. Sun,
Y. Wang, B. Wu, T. Xue, R. Ye, J. Zeng, D. Zhang,
J. Zhang, L. Zhang, T. Zhang, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang,
Z. Zhang, H. Zheng, H. Zhou, T. Zhu, X. Zhu, Q. Zhou,
and W. E, Bohrium + scimaster: Building the infras-

15
tructure and ecosystem for agentic science at scale,
arXiv 10.48550/arxiv.2512.20469 (2025).
[27] J. Ruža and R. Gomez-Bombarelli, Reasoning-tosimulation: An agentic framework for discovery of electrolyte materials, in AI for Accelerated Materials Design
- ICLR 2026 (2026).
[28] M. Soleymanibrojeni, R. Aydin, D. Guedes-Sobrinho,
A. C. Dias, M. J. Piotrowski, W. Wenzel, and C. R. C.
Rêgo, Genius: an agentic ai framework for autonomous
design and execution of simulation protocols, Communications Materials 7, 115 (2026).
[29] S. G. H. Kumar, Y. Zou, A. Wang, J. ValdésHernández, T. W. Ko, N. Yue, O. Leng, H. Xu, C. Crebolder, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and V. Bernales, El agente
sólido: A new age(nt) for solid state simulations, arXiv
10.48550/arxiv.2602.17886 (2026).
[30] H. Chase, LangChain (2022).
[31] Anthropic, Claude code, https://www.anthropic.com/
claude-code (2025).
[32] P. Gauthier, Aider: AI pair programming in your terminal, https://aider.chat (2023), open-source software,
https://github.com/Aider-AI/aider.
[33] OpenAI, Introducing Codex, https://openai.com/i
ndex/introducing-codex/ (2025), codex CLI released
April 2025; cloud agent research preview May 2025; generally available October 6, 2025.
[34] Google, Gemini CLI: Your open-source AI agent, https:
//blog.google/technology/developers/introducin
g-gemini-cli-open-source-ai-agent/ (2025), opensource software, https://github.com/google-gemini/
gemini-cli.
[35] Anysphere, Cursor: The AI Code Editor, https://cu
rsor.com (2023).
[36] Google, Build with Google Antigravity, our new agentic
development platform, https://developers.googleb
log.com/build-with-google-antigravity-our-new
-agentic-development-platform/ (2025).
[37] Codeium, Windsurf Editor, https://windsurf.com
(2024), codeium rebranded to Windsurf in April 2025;
acquired by OpenAI in May 2025.
[38] C. Zhou, H. Chai, W. Chen, Z. Guo, R. Shan, Y. Song,
T. Xu, Y. Yang, A. Yu, W. Zhang, C. Zheng, J. Zhu,
Z. Zheng, Z. Zhang, X. Lou, C. Zhang, Z. Fu, J. Wang,
W. Liu, J. Lin, and W. Zhang, Externalization in llm
agents: A unified review of memory, skills, protocols and
harness engineering, arXiv 10.48550/arxiv.2604.08224
(2026).
[39] S. Kapoor, B. Stroebl, Z. S. Siegel, N. Nadgir, and
A. Narayanan, AI agents that matter, Transactions on
Machine Learning Research (2025).
[40] S. Kapoor, B. Stroebl, P. Kirgis, N. Nadgir, Z. S. Siegel,
B. Wei, T. Xue, Z. Chen, F. Chen, S. Utpala, F. Ndzomga, D. Oruganty, S. Luskin, K. Liu, B. Yu, A. Arora,
D. Hahm, H. Trivedi, H. Sun, J. Lee, T. Jin, Y. Mai,
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhu, R. Bommasani, D. Kang, D. Song,
P. Henderson, Y. Su, P. Liang, and A. Narayanan, Holistic agent leaderboard: The missing infrastructure for AI
agent evaluation, in The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2026).
[41] Anthropic, Equipping agents for the real world with
Agent Skills, https://www.anthropic.com/engine
ering/equipping-agents-for-the-real-world-wit
h-agent-skills (2025).

[42] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin,
N. Goyal, H. Küttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih,
T. Rocktäschel, S. Riedel, and D. Kiela, Retrievalaugmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp
tasks, arXiv 10.48550/arxiv.2005.11401 (2020).
[43] N. F. Liu, K. Lin, J. Hewitt, A. Paranjape, M. Bevilacqua, F. Petroni, and P. Liang, Lost in the middle:
How language models use long contexts, Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics 12, 157
(2024).
[44] C.-P. Hsieh, S. Sun, S. Kriman, S. Acharya, D. Rekesh,
F. Jia, Y. Zhang, and B. Ginsburg, Ruler: What’s the
real context size of your long-context language models?,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06654 (2024).
[45] A. Modarressi, H. Deilamsalehy, F. Dernoncourt,
T. Bui, R. A. Rossi, S. Yoon, and H. Schütze, Nolima: Long-context evaluation beyond literal matching,
in Forty-second International Conference on Machine
Learning (2025).
[46] K. Hong, A. Troynikov, and J. Huber, Context Rot: How
Increasing Input Tokens Impacts LLM Performance,
Tech. Rep. (Chroma, 2025).
[47] F. Shi, X. Chen, K. Misra, N. Scales, D. Dohan, E. Chi,
N. Schärli, and D. Zhou, Large language models can be
easily distracted by irrelevant context, in Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML’23 (JMLR.org, 2023).
[48] Anthropic, Introducing the Model Context Protocol, ht
tps://www.anthropic.com/news/model-context-pro
tocol (2024), accessed: 2026-04-28.
[49] S. Gao, R. Zhu, P. Sui, Z. Kong, S. Aldogom, Y. Huang,
A. Noori, R. Shamji, K. Parvataneni, T. Tsiligkaridis,
and M. Zitnik, Democratizing ai scientists using tooluniverse, arXiv 10.48550/arxiv.2509.23426 (2025).
[50] K-Dense Inc., Scientific agent skills: A comprehensive
collection of scientific tools for ai agents (2026), 133
skills covering databases, packages, integrations, and
analysis tools.
[51] L. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Sun, W. Tang, H. Su, Y. Qian,
Q. Yang, Q. Li, Z. Tang, H. Sun, Y. Han, Y. Jiang,
W. Lou, B. Zhou, X. Wang, L. Bai, and Z. Xie, Molclaw:
An autonomous agent with hierarchical skills for drug
molecule evaluation, screening, and optimization, arXiv
(2026).
[52] M. Ishimaru, S. Munetoh, and T. Motooka, Generation of amorphous silicon structures by rapid quenching: A molecular-dynamics study, Physical Review B
56, 15133–15138 (1997).
[53] W. Sun, S. T. Dacek, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, A. Jain,
W. D. Richards, A. C. Gamst, K. A. Persson, and
G. Ceder, The thermodynamic scale of inorganic crystalline metastability, Science Advances 2, e1600225
(2016).
[54] B. M. Wood, M. Dzamba, X. Fu, M. Gao,
M. Shuaibi, L. Barroso-Luque, K. Abdelmaqsoud,
V. Gharakhanyan, J. R. Kitchin, D. S. Levine,
K. Michel, A. Sriram, T. Cohen, A. Das, A. Rizvi,
S. J. Sahoo, Z. W. Ulissi, and C. L. Zitnick,
Uma: A family of universal models for atoms, arXiv
10.48550/arxiv.2506.23971 (2025).
[55] T. W. Ko, B. Deng, M. Nassar, L. Barroso-Luque,
R. Liu, J. Qi, A. C. Thakur, A. R. Mishra, E. Liu,
G. Ceder, S. Miret, and S. P. Ong, Materials graph library (matgl), an open-source graph deep learning li-

16
brary for materials science and chemistry, npj Computational Materials 11, 253 (2025).
[56] I. Batatia, P. Benner, Y. Chiang, A. M. Elena, D. P.
Kovács, J. Riebesell, X. R. Advincula, M. Asta,
M. Avaylon, W. J. Baldwin, F. Berger, N. Bernstein,
A. Bhowmik, F. Bigi, S. M. Blau, V. Cărare, M. Ceriotti, S. Chong, J. P. Darby, S. De, F. D. Pia, V. L.
Deringer, R. Elijošius, Z. El-Machachi, E. Fako, F. Falcioni, A. C. Ferrari, J. L. A. Gardner, M. J. Gawkowski,
A. Genreith-Schriever, J. George, R. E. A. Goodall,
J. Grandel, C. P. Grey, P. Grigorev, S. Han, W. Handley, H. H. Heenen, K. Hermansson, C. H. Ho, S. Hofmann, C. Holm, J. Jaafar, K. S. Jakob, H. Jung,
V. Kapil, A. D. Kaplan, N. Karimitari, J. R. Kermode, P. Kourtis, N. Kroupa, J. Kullgren, M. C. Kuner,
D. Kuryla, G. Liepuoniute, C. Lin, J. T. Margraf, I.B. Magdău, A. Michaelides, J. H. Moore, A. A. Naik,
S. P. Niblett, S. W. Norwood, N. O’Neill, C. Ortner,
K. A. Persson, K. Reuter, A. S. Rosen, L. A. M. Rosset,
L. L. Schaaf, C. Schran, B. X. Shi, E. Sivonxay, T. K.
Stenczel, C. Sutton, V. Svahn, T. D. Swinburne, J. Tilly,
C. v. d. Oord, S. Vargas, E. Varga-Umbrich, T. Vegge,
M. Vondrák, Y. Wang, W. C. Witt, T. Wolf, F. Zills,
and G. Csányi, A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry, The Journal of Chemical Physics 163,
184110 (2025).
[57] L. Barroso-Luque, J. H. Yang, F. Xie, T. Chen, R. L.
Kam, Z. Jadidi, P. Zhong, and G. Ceder, smol: A
python package for cluster expansions and beyond,
Journal of Open Source Software 7, 4504 (2022).
[58] C. Zeni, R. Pinsler, D. Zügner, A. Fowler, M. Horton, X. Fu, Z. Wang, A. Shysheya, J. Crabbé, S. Ueda,
R. Sordillo, L. Sun, J. Smith, B. Nguyen, H. Schulz,
S. Lewis, C.-W. Huang, Z. Lu, Y. Zhou, H. Yang,
H. Hao, J. Li, C. Yang, W. Li, R. Tomioka, and T. Xie,
A generative model for inorganic materials design, Nature , 1–3 (2025).
[59] R. Jiao, W. Huang, Y. Liu, D. Zhao, and Y. Liu, Space
group constrained crystal generation, in The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations
(2024).
[60] G. S. Na, Cross-modality material embedding loss for
transferring knowledge between heterogeneous material descriptors, npj Computational Materials 11, 235
(2025).
[61] T. Ueno, H. Hino, A. Hashimoto, Y. Takeichi,
M. Sawada, and K. Ono, Adaptive design of an x-ray
magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy experiment
with gaussian process modelling, npj Computational
Materials 4, 4 (2018).
[62] C. Liu, Y. Bai, J. Zhou, Q. Zhao, Y. Yang, H. Chen, and
L. Qiao, High-performance bifunctional polarization
switch chiral metamaterials by inverse design method,
npj Computational Materials 5, 93 (2019).
[63] T. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Q. Wei, X. Shi, P. Zhao, L.-Q. Chen,
and S. Zhang, Active cell-matrix coupling regulates cellular force landscapes of cohesive epithelial monolayers,
npj Computational Materials 4, 10 (2018).
[64] Y. Zhu, X. He, and Y. Mo, Origin of outstanding stability in the lithium solid electrolyte materials: Insights
from thermodynamic analyses based on first-principles
calculations, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 7,
23685–23693 (2015).

[65] C. Chen, D. T. Nguyen, S. J. Lee, N. A. Baker, A. S.
Karakoti, L. Lauw, C. Owen, K. T. Mueller, B. A.
Bilodeau, V. Murugesan, and M. Troyer, Accelerating
computational materials discovery with machine learning and cloud high-performance computing: from largescale screening to experimental validation, Journal of
the American Chemical Society 10.1021/jacs.4c03849
(2024).
[66] S. Majumdar, S. M. Moosavi, K. M. Jablonka, D. Ongari, and B. Smit, Diversifying databases of metal organic frameworks for high-throughput computational
screening, ACS applied materials & interfaces 13, 61004
(2021).
[67] H. Park, S. Majumdar, X. Zhang, J. Kim, and B. Smit,
Inverse design of metal–organic frameworks for direct
air capture of co 2 via deep reinforcement learning, Digital Discovery 3, 728 (2024).
[68] Y. Kang and J. Kim, Chatmof: an artificial intelligence system for predicting and generating metalorganic frameworks using large language models, Nature
Communications 15, 4705 (2024).
[69] A. S. Rosen, S. M. Iyer, D. Ray, Z. Yao, A. AspuruGuzik, L. Gagliardi, J. M. Notestein, and R. Q. Snurr,
Machine learning the quantum-chemical properties of
metal–organic frameworks for accelerated materials discovery, Matter 4, 1578 (2021).
[70] J. Burner, J. Luo, A. White, A. Mirmiran, O. Kwon,
P. G. Boyd, S. Maley, M. Gibaldi, S. Simrod, V. Ogden, et al., Arc–mof: a diverse database of metal-organic
frameworks with dft-derived partial atomic charges and
descriptors for machine learning, Chemistry of Materials 35, 900 (2023).
[71] B. Widom, Some topics in the theory of fluids, The Journal of Chemical Physics 39, 2808–2812 (1963).
[72] A. Kumar, D. G. Madden, M. Lusi, K.-J. Chen, E. A.
Daniels, T. Curtin, J. J. Perry, and M. J. Zaworotko, Direct air capture of co2 by physisorbent materials, Angewandte Chemie International Edition 54, 14372–14377
(2015).
[73] A. Samanta, A. Zhao, G. K. H. Shimizu, P. Sarkar, and
R. Gupta, Post-combustion co2 capture using solid sorbents: A review, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
Research 51, 1438–1463 (2012).
[74] L. Jiang, W. Liu, R. Wang, A. Gonzalez-Diaz, M. RojasMichaga, S. Michailos, M. Pourkashanian, X. Zhang,
and C. Font-Palma, Sorption direct air capture with co2
utilization, Progress in Energy and Combustion Science
95, 101069 (2023).
[75] C. Chen and S. P. Ong, A universal graph deep learning interatomic potential for the periodic table, Nature
Computational Science 2, 718–728 (2022).
[76] R. Jacobs, D. Morgan, S. Attarian, J. Meng, C. Shen,
Z. Wu, C. Y. Xie, J. H. Yang, N. Artrith, B. Blaiszik,
G. Ceder, K. Choudhary, G. Csanyi, E. D. Cubuk,
B. Deng, R. Drautz, X. Fu, J. Godwin, V. Honavar,
O. Isayev, A. Johansson, S. Martiniani, S. P. Ong,
I. Poltavsky, K. Schmidt, S. Takamoto, A. P. Thompson, J. Westermayr, B. M. Wood, and B. Kozinsky, A
practical guide to machine learning interatomic potentials – status and future, Current Opinion in Solid State
and Materials Science 35, 101214 (2025).
[77] E. C.-Y. Yuan, Y. Liu, J. Chen, P. Zhong, S. Raja,
T. Kreiman, S. Vargas, W. Xu, M. Head-Gordon,
C. Yang, S. M. Blau, B. Cheng, A. Krishnapriyan,

17
and T. Head-Gordon, Foundation models for atomistic
simulation of chemistry and materials, Nature Reviews
Chemistry 10, 212–230 (2026).
[78] B. Deng, P. Zhong, K. Jun, J. Riebesell, K. Han, C. J.
Bartel, and G. Ceder, Chgnet as a pretrained universal
neural network potential for charge-informed atomistic
modelling, Nature Machine Intelligence , 1–11 (2023).
[79] A. D. Kaplan, R. Liu, J. Qi, T. W. Ko, B. Deng,
J. Riebesell, G. Ceder, K. A. Persson, and S. P. Ong, A
foundational potential energy surface dataset for materials, arXiv 10.48550/arxiv.2503.04070 (2025).
[80] T. Perez and R. Gomez-Bombarelli, Self-conditioned
denoising for atomistic representation learning, arXiv
10.48550/arXiv.2603.17196 (2026), arXiv:2603.17196.
[81] B. Deng, Y. Choi, P. Zhong, J. Riebesell, S. Anand,
Z. Li, K. Jun, K. A. Persson, and G. Ceder, Systematic softening in universal machine learning interatomic
potentials, npj Computational Materials 11, 9 (2025).
[82] X. Fu, Z. Wu, W. Wang, T. Xie, S. Keten, R. GomezBombarelli, and T. Jaakkola, Forces are not enough:
Benchmark and critical evaluation for machine learning
force fields with molecular simulations, Transactions on
Machine Learning Research 10.48550/arxiv.2210.07237
(2022).
[83] J. Riebesell, R. E. A. Goodall, P. Benner, Y. Chiang,
B. Deng, G. Ceder, M. Asta, A. A. Lee, A. Jain, and
K. A. Persson, A framework to evaluate machine learning crystal stability predictions, Nature Machine Intelligence 7, 836–847 (2025).
[84] J. Qi, T. W. Ko, B. C. Wood, T. A. Pham, and S. P.
Ong, Robust training of machine learning interatomic
potentials with dimensionality reduction and stratified
sampling, npj Computational Materials 10, 43 (2024).
[85] A. Lahouari, J. Rogal, and M. E. Tuckerman,
Automated machine learning pipeline for training
and analysis using large language models, arXiv
10.48550/arxiv.2509.21647 (2025).
[86] S. P. Ong, Y. Mo, W. D. Richards, L. Miara, H. S. Lee,
and G. Ceder, Phase stability, electrochemical stability
and ionic conductivity of the li 10±1 mp 2 x 12 (m
= ge, si, sn, al or p, and x = o, s or se) family of
superionic conductors, Energy & Environmental Science
6, 148–156 (2012).
[87] E. Lionta, G. Spyrou, D. Vassilatis, and Z. Cournia,
Structure-Based Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery:
Principles, Applications and Recent Advances, Current
Topics in Medicinal Chemistry 14, 1923 (2014).
[88] J. Lyu, S. Wang, T. E. Balius, I. Singh, A. Levit, Y. S.
Moroz, M. J. O’Meara, T. Che, E. Algaa, K. Tolmachova, A. A. Tolmachev, B. K. Shoichet, B. L. Roth,
and J. J. Irwin, Ultra-large library docking for discovering new chemotypes, Nature 566, 224 (2019).
[89] B. J. Bender, S. Gahbauer, A. Luttens, J. Lyu, C. M.
Webb, R. M. Stein, E. A. Fink, T. E. Balius, J. Carlsson,
J. J. Irwin, and B. K. Shoichet, A practical guide to
large-scale docking, Nature Protocols 16, 4799 (2021).
[90] M. M. Mysinger, M. Carchia, John. J. Irwin, and B. K.
Shoichet, Directory of Useful Decoys, Enhanced (DUDE): Better Ligands and Decoys for Better Benchmarking, Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 55, 6582 (2012).
[91] H. M. Berman, The Protein Data Bank, Nucleic Acids
Research 28, 235 (2000).
[92] T. G. Davies, J. Bentley, C. E. Arris, F. T. Boyle, N. J.
Curtin, J. A. Endicott, A. E. Gibson, B. T. Golding,

R. J. Griffin, I. R. Hardcastle, P. Jewsbury, L. N. Johnson, V. Mesguiche, D. R. Newell, M. E. Noble, J. A.
Tucker, L. Wang, and H. J. Whitfield, Structure-based
design of a potent purine-based cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor, Nature Structural Biology 9, 745 (2002).
[93] S. Riniker and G. A. Landrum, Better Informed Distance Geometry: Using What We Know To Improve
Conformation Generation, Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 55, 2562 (2015).
[94] D. Santos-Martins, Y. He, J. Eberhardt, P. Sharma,
N. Bruciaferri, M. Holcomb, M. A. Llanos, A. HanselHarris, A. P. Barkdull, A. F. Tillack, G. Bianco, M.L. Paulsen, J. Mato, I. Taneja, and S. Forli, Meeko:
Molecule Parametrization and Software Interoperability
for Docking and Beyond, Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 65, 13045 (2025).
[95] O. Trott and A. J. Olson, AutoDock Vina: Improving
the speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading,
Journal of Computational Chemistry 31, 455 (2010).
[96] S. Boothroyd, P. K. Behara, O. C. Madin, D. F. Hahn,
H. Jang, V. Gapsys, J. R. Wagner, J. T. Horton, D. L.
Dotson, M. W. Thompson, J. Maat, T. Gokey, L.-P.
Wang, D. J. Cole, M. K. Gilson, J. D. Chodera, C. I.
Bayly, M. R. Shirts, and D. L. Mobley, Development
and Benchmarking of Open Force Field 2.0.0: The Sage
Small Molecule Force Field, Journal of Chemical Theory
and Computation 19, 3251 (2023).
[97] J. A. Maier, C. Martinez, K. Kasavajhala, L. Wickstrom, K. E. Hauser, and C. Simmerling, ff14SB: Improving the Accuracy of Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from ff99SB, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 11, 3696 (2015).
[98] W. L. Jorgensen, J. Chandrasekhar, J. D. Madura,
R. W. Impey, and M. L. Klein, Comparison of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water, The
Journal of Chemical Physics 79, 926 (1983).
[99] P. Eastman, R. Galvelis, R. P. Peláez, C. R. A. Abreu,
S. E. Farr, E. Gallicchio, A. Gorenko, M. M. Henry,
F. Hu, J. Huang, A. Krämer, J. Michel, J. A. Mitchell,
V. S. Pande, J. P. Rodrigues, J. Rodriguez-Guerra,
A. C. Simmonett, S. Singh, J. Swails, P. Turner,
Y. Wang, I. Zhang, J. D. Chodera, G. De Fabritiis, and
T. E. Markland, OpenMM 8: Molecular Dynamics Simulation with Machine Learning Potentials, The Journal
of Physical Chemistry B 128, 109 (2024).
[100] C. W. Hopkins, S. Le Grand, R. C. Walker, and
A. E. Roitberg, Long-Time-Step Molecular Dynamics through Hydrogen Mass Repartitioning, Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation 11, 1864 (2015).
[101] S. Genheden and U. Ryde, The MM/PBSA and
MM/GBSA methods to estimate ligand-binding affinities, Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery 10, 449 (2015).
[102] H. Nguyen, D. R. Roe, and C. Simmerling, Improved
Generalized Born Solvent Model Parameters for Protein
Simulations, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 9, 2020 (2013).
[103] J. Eberhardt, D. Santos-Martins, A. F. Tillack, and
S. Forli, AutoDock Vina 1.2.0: New Docking Methods,
Expanded Force Field, and Python Bindings, Journal of
Chemical Information and Modeling 61, 3891 (2021).
[104] I. C. Man, H.-Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I.
Martı́nez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K.
Nørskov, and J. Rossmeisl, Universality in oxygen evolu-

18
tion electrocatalysis on oxide surfaces, ChemCatChem
3, 1159–1165 (2011).
[105] O. Turayev, X-ray structural analysis and superconducting properties of yba2cu3o7–δ (ybco) synthesized
via solid-state reaction, INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 2, 138 (2025).
[106] Y. Fei, M. J. McDermott, C. L. Rom, S. Wang, and
G. Ceder, Dara: Automated multiple-hypothesis phase
identification and refinement from powder x-ray diffraction, Chemistry of Materials 38, 1364–1376 (2026).
[107] E. Kim, K. Huang, A. Saunders, A. McCallum,
G. Ceder, and E. Olivetti, Materials synthesis insights
from scientific literature via text extraction and machine
learning, Chemistry of Materials 29, 9436–9444 (2017).
[108] S. Lee, K. Cruse, V. Baibakova, G. Ceder, and A. Jain,
Text-mined dataset of solid-state syntheses with impurity phases using large language model, Scientific Data
12, 1969 (2025).
[109] Z. Wang, K. Cruse, Y. Fei, A. Chia, Y. Zeng, H. Huo,
T. He, B. Deng, O. Kononova, and G. Ceder, Ulsa: unified language of synthesis actions for the representation
of inorganic synthesis protocols, Digital Discovery 1,
313–324 (2022).
[110] J. R. Lunger, J. Karaguesian, H. Chun, J. Peng,
Y. Tseo, C. H. Shan, B. Han, Y. Shao-Horn, and
R. Gómez-Bombarelli, Towards atom-level understanding of metal oxide catalysts for the oxygen evolution
reaction with machine learning, npj Computational Materials 10, 80 (2024).
[111] M. J. Kolb and F. Calle-Vallejo, The bifunctional volcano plot: thermodynamic limits for single-atom catalysts for oxygen reduction and evolution, Journal of
Materials Chemistry A 10, 5937 (2022).
[112] Y. Zhang, S. Jiang, R. Li, J. Tu, Y. Su, L. Deng,
X. Guo, C. Lv, and J. Lin, Deepplanning: Benchmarking long-horizon agentic planning with verifiable constraints, arXiv 10.48550/arxiv.2601.18137 (2026).
[113] S. Feng, R. Ma, X. Yan, Y. Fan, Y. Hu, S. Huang,
S. Zhang, Z. Cao, T. Peng, J. Yuan, Z. Guo, Z. Zhong,
S. Du, W. Wang, J. Shi, Y. Zhou, X. He, Z. Yu, F. Yu,
Q. Zheng, J. Wu, M. Liu, C. Zhang, S. Hou, S. Li,
Y. Jiang, W. Lou, L. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Wang, W. Xu,
Y. Deng, D. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, F. Ling, S. Zhang,
X. Wang, S. Zheng, X. Huang, S. Sun, S. Hu, P. Ye,
C. Song, B. Wang, C. He, Y. Liu, X. Li, Q. Hou,
T. Chen, X. Yue, B. Wang, L. He, D. Lin, B. Zhou,
B. Zhang, and L. Bai, Internagent-1.5: A unified agentic
framework for long-horizon autonomous scientific discovery, arXiv 10.48550/arxiv.2602.08990 (2026).
[114] Y. Du, B. Yu, T. Liu, T. Shen, J. Chen, J. G. Rittig,
K. Sun, Y. Zhang, Z. Song, B. Zhou, C. Masschelein,
Y. Wang, H. Wang, H. Jia, C. Zhang, H. Zhao, M. Ester, T. Head-Gordon, C. P. Gomes, H. Sun, C. Duan,
P. Schwaller, and W. Jin, Accelerating scientific discovery with autonomous goal-evolving agents, arXiv
(2025).
[115] X. Huang, J. Chen, Y. Fei, Z. Li, P. Schwaller, and
G. Ceder, Cascade: Cumulative agentic skill creation
through autonomous development and evolution, arXiv
10.48550/arxiv.2512.23880 (2025).
[116] Z. Ma, S. Yang, Y. Ji, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Hu,
T. Huang, and X. Chu, Skillclaw: Let skills evolve collectively with agentic evolver, arXiv (2026).

[117] Z. Zhang, A. Yin, A. Baweja, J. Bai, I. Gustin,
V. Bernales, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, El agente forjador:
Task-driven agent generation for quantum simulation,
arXiv (2026).
[118] H. Zhang, S. Fan, H. P. Zou, Y. Chen, Z. Wang,
J. Zhou, C. Li, W.-C. Huang, Y. Yao, K. Zheng,
X. Liu, X. Li, and P. S. Yu, Coevoskills: Selfevolving agent skills via co-evolutionary verification,
arXiv 10.48550/arxiv.2604.01687 (2026).
[119] X. Li, W. Chen, Y. Liu, S. Zheng, X. Chen, Y. He, Y. Li,
B. You, H. Shen, J. Sun, S. Wang, Q. Zeng, D. Wang,
X. Zhao, Y. Wang, R. B. Chaim, Z. Di, Y. Gao, J. He,
Y. He, L. Jing, L. Kong, X. Lan, J. Li, S. Li, Y. Li,
Y. Lin, X. Liu, X. Liu, H. Lyu, Z. Ma, B. Wang,
R. Wang, T. Wang, W. Ye, Y. Zhang, H. Xing, Y. Xue,
S. Dillmann, and H.-c. Lee, Skillsbench: Benchmarking
how well agent skills work across diverse tasks, arXiv
(2026).
[120] Y. Liu, J. Ji, L. An, T. Jaakkola, Y. Zhang, and
S. Chang, How well do agentic skills work in the wild:
Benchmarking llm skill usage in realistic settings, arXiv
(2026).
[121] L. Mitchener, J. M. Laurent, A. Andonian, B. Tenmann,
S. Narayanan, G. P. Wellawatte, A. White, L. Sani, and
S. G. Rodriques, Bixbench: a comprehensive benchmark
for llm-based agents in computational biology, arXiv
10.48550/arxiv.2503.00096 (2025).
[122] A. H. Larsen, J. J. Mortensen, J. Blomqvist, I. E.
Castelli, R. Christensen, M. Dulak, J. Friis, M. N.
Groves, B. Hammer, C. Hargus, E. D. Hermes, P. C.
Jennings, P. B. Jensen, J. Kermode, J. R. Kitchin, E. L.
Kolsbjerg, J. Kubal, K. Kaasbjerg, S. Lysgaard, J. B.
Maronsson, T. Maxson, T. Olsen, L. Pastewka, A. Peterson, C. Rostgaard, J. Schiøtz, O. Schütt, M. Strange,
K. S. Thygesen, T. Vegge, L. Vilhelmsen, M. Walter,
Z. Zeng, and K. W. Jacobsen, The atomic simulation
environment—a python library for working with atoms,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 273002
(2017).
[123] S. P. Ong, W. D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier,
M. Kocher, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, V. L. Chevrier, K. A.
Persson, and G. Ceder, Python materials genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source python library for materials analysis, Computational Materials Science 68,
314–319 (2013).
[124] G. Landrum, Rdkit: Open-source cheminformatics
(2026).
[125] G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Efficient iterative schemes
for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave
basis set, Physical Review B 54, 11169–11186 (1996).

19

Supplementary Information:
Harnessing AtomisticSkills for Agentic Atomistic Research

CONTENTS

I. Introduction

1

II. Results
A. AtomisticSkills Coverage in Literature
B. Generative design of Li-ion solid conductor
C. Computational screening of MOF for CO2 capture
D. Agentic MLIP benchmark and fine-tuning
E. Structure-based high-throughput virtual screening for drug discovery
F. Multimodal analysis of XRD patterns
G. Screening of Fe-oxide for oxygen evolution reaction

4
4
6
7
7
8
10
10

III. Discussion

11

IV. Methods
A. Integration into General-Purpose Coding Agents
B. Simulation Infrastructure
C. Literature Mining and Skill Identification

12
12
12
13

V. Code Availability

13

VI. Acknowledgments

13

VII. Author Contributions

13

VIII. Competing Interests

13

References
Supplementary Information: Harnessing AtomisticSkills for Agentic Atomistic Research

13
19

Coverage Analysis for Chemistry Literature

20

Coverage Analysis for Drug Discovery Literature

20

Integration in Agentic IDEs

21

20
COVERAGE ANALYSIS FOR CHEMISTRY LITERATURE

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. S1. Coverage analysis of AtomisticSkills compared to chemistry literature. (a) Histogram of the number of
skills used in each paper, text-mined from 500 published research articles from The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters. (b)
The 30 most frequently used scientific skills. The histogram indicates their frequency appeared in literature, and the color
scheme indicates whether the skill is covered by AtomisticSkill. (c) Histogram of the skill coverage percentage of AtomisticSkills
in each paper. The result indicates that AtomisticSkills can fully cover around 8% of computational chemistry journal articles.
And on average, AtomisticSkills covers 44.9% of computational chemistry skills usage.

To evaluate the applicability of the AtomisticSkills framework in the domain of chemistry and drug discovery, we
performed a skill coverage analysis on 500 randomly sampled journal articles from The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters. Similar to the materials science literature analysis, we decomposed the publications into skills and
benchmarked them to AtomisticSkills. Supplementary Fig. S1 (a) illustrates the number of skills identified from each
article. Supplementary Fig. S1 (b) highlights the 30 most frequently utilized skills found in these articles, and whether
they’re covered by AtomisticSkills. Supplementary Fig. S1 (c) shows the distribution of coverage percentage of the
500 articles from The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters.
COVERAGE ANALYSIS FOR DRUG DISCOVERY LITERATURE

We also present a benchmark for drug-discovery skills. Because no single flagship journal is exclusively dedicated
to computational drug discovery, we curated a dataset of 500 open-access articles retrieved via keyword filtering from
PubMed and arXiv. The specific search queries used for each repository were as follows:
arXiv Search Queries:
• all:"molecular docking" AND (cat:q-bio.BM OR cat:physics.chem-ph OR cat:physics.comp-ph OR
cat:q-bio.QM OR cat:cs.LG)

21
• all:"virtual screening" AND (cat:q-bio.BM OR cat:physics.chem-ph OR cat:physics.comp-ph OR
cat:q-bio.QM OR cat:cs.LG)
• all:("MM-GBSA" OR "MM/GBSA" OR "MM-PBSA" OR "MM/PBSA")
• all:("free energy perturbation" OR "FEP+" OR "alchemical free energy")
• all:"binding free energy" AND (all:"molecular dynamics" OR all:"simulation")
• all:"protein-ligand" AND (all:"docking" OR all:"molecular dynamics")
• all:("HTVS" OR "high-throughput virtual screening")
• all:("absolute binding free energy" OR "relative binding free energy")
• all:"drug discovery" AND (all:"molecular dynamics" OR all:"docking")
PubMed Search Queries:
• ("molecular docking"[tiab]) AND ("protein-ligand"[tiab] OR "drug discovery"[tiab] OR "lead
optimization"[tiab])
• ("virtual screening"[tiab]) AND ("drug discovery"[tiab] OR "hit"[tiab] OR "lead"[tiab])
• ("MM-GBSA"[tiab] OR "MM/GBSA"[tiab] OR "MM-PBSA"[tiab] OR "MM/PBSA"[tiab])
• ("free energy perturbation"[tiab] OR "alchemical free energy"[tiab] OR "FEP+"[tiab])
• ("binding free energy"[tiab]) AND ("molecular dynamics"[tiab] OR "simulation"[tiab])
• ("absolute binding free energy"[tiab] OR "relative binding free energy"[tiab])
• ("HTVS"[tiab] OR "high-throughput virtual screening"[tiab])
• ("molecular dynamics"[tiab]) AND ("protein-ligand"[tiab] OR "drug-target"[tiab])
• ("metadynamics"[tiab] OR "umbrella sampling"[tiab]) AND ("ligand"[tiab] OR "binding"[tiab])
Supplementary Fig. S2 presents a similar coverage analysis for drug discovery. Supplementary Fig. S2 (a) illustrates
the number of skills identified from each article. Supplementary Fig. S2 (b) highlights the 30 most frequently utilized
skills in the drug-discovery articles, and whether they’re covered by AtomisticSkills. Supplementary Fig. S2 (c) shows
the distribution of coverage percentage of the 500 open-access articles retrieved from PubMed and arXiv.

INTEGRATION IN AGENTIC IDES

The AtomisticSkills framework is designed to be natively integrated into general-purpose agentic Integrated Development Environments (IDEs). By embedding the skills, tools, and rules into the system prompt of the underlying
large language models, these IDEs gain specialized atomistic research capabilities. Supplementary Figure S3 presents
screenshots of AtomisticSkills in Google Antigravity. Supplementary Figure S4 presents screenshots of AtomisticSkills
in OpenClaw.

22
(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. S2. Coverage analysis of AtomisticSkills compared to drug discovery literature. (a) Histogram of the number
of skills used in each paper, text-mined from 500 published research articles from PubMed and arXiv. (b) The 30 most
frequently used scientific skills. The histogram indicates their frequency appeared in literature, and the color scheme indicates
whether the skill is covered by AtomisticSkill. (c) Histogram of the skill coverage percentage of AtomisticSkills in each paper.
The result indicates that AtomisticSkills can fully cover around 14% of computational drug-discovery articles. And on average,
AtomisticSkills covers 62.4% of computational drug-discovery skills usage.

23

FIG. S3. AtomisticSkills in Google Antigravity. Screenshots demonstrating the usage of AtomisticSkills in Google
Antigravity

24

(a)

(b)

FIG. S4. AtomisticSkills in OpenClaw. Screenshots demonstrating the usage of AtomisticSkills in (a) OpenClaw computer
interface. (d)OpenClaw phone interface

