CogEEGAgent: Toward Autonomous Cognitive EEG Analysis with Grounded
Execution and Selection-Aware Verification
Dengzhe Hou1, 2∗ , Lingyu Jiang1 , Fangzhou Lin3, 4 , Kazunori D Yamada1, 2
1

2

Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University
Unprecedented-scale Data Analytics Center, Tohoku University
3
Texas A&M University
4
Worcester Polytechnic Institute

arXiv:2607.25045v1 [cs.AI] 27 Jul 2026

Abstract
Electroencephalography (EEG) analysis in cognitive studies
requires specialized expertise and involves many defensible
choices over contrasts, channels, time windows, and statistical tests. LLM agents can translate varied natural-language
questions into analysis choices, offering a flexible interface
for automation. Yet fluent reports alone cannot establish that
an agent selected the requested analysis or evaluated a confirmatory claim independently of adaptive search. We present
CogEEGAgent, a cognitive-EEG analysis agent grounded in
MNE-Python. Its EEG-specific scientific harness separates
semantic from scientific authority. The LLM interprets intent
and proposes registered analyses, while deterministic components validate typed contracts, control confirmation access,
and authorize evidence-bound release. On a prespecified routing benchmark, CogEEGAgent maps language to registered
analyses more accurately than a matched deterministic router,
while matched preflight makes both systems abstain whenever required. In an externally model-authored, outcome-blind
campaign, the complete system releases supported analyses
with participant-disjoint confirmation and blocks prespecified
capability hazards and lifecycle-reuse requests. Policy stress
testing shows that held-out confirmation curbs false positives
from uncorrected adaptive search. Together, these studies establish bounded autonomy and an auditable automation framework for cognitive-EEG workflows. More broadly, they show
how scientific agents can combine flexible language understanding with fail-closed control over inference and release.

1

Introduction

Electroencephalography (EEG) is a cornerstone of cognitive neuroscience, providing millisecond-resolution recordings of brain activity during perception, attention, language,
and motor tasks (Luck 2014). Analyzing cognitive EEG data
requires complex multi-step workflows that include loading
recordings, filtering and artifact removal, epoching, extracting event-related potentials (ERPs) or spectra, and statistical
testing (Gramfort et al. 2013). Each step involves choices
that can silently propagate errors. The space of defensible pipelines is large. In one study, 70 teams analyzing the
same neuroimaging dataset used 70 distinct workflows and
reached divergent conclusions (Botvinik-Nezer et al. 2020),
while preprocessing choices alone can undermine EEG reliability (Hou et al. 2026). Automation also scales researcher
∗

Corresponding author.

degrees of freedom because even successful tool calls do
not preserve nominal error when an agent searches plausible
analyses and reports the most favorable one.
Recent LLM agents automate scientific analysis through
tool-augmented planning (Lu et al. 2024). In EEG, existing systems target clinical interpretation, classification, or
pipeline optimization rather than cognitive inference. Their
reported benchmarks typically emphasize task performance,
completion, routing, or tool choice (Zhou et al. 2026). CogEEGAgent adds two safeguards. It checks that inferential claims are supported by successful statistical returns
and commits to an analysis before confirmation evidence
is opened.
We build CogEEGAgent, a tool-grounded LLM agent
for auditable cognitive-EEG analysis over pre-loaded data.
Figure 1 summarizes its EEG-specific scientific harness,
which separates semantic authority from scientific authority through executable trace–partition–evidence binding.
The LLM selects a registered analysis from natural language, while deterministic code owns contract materialization, checks, data access, commitment, inference, falsification, and reporting. The Scientific Control Plane provides the
prospective release path, and Paradigm-Conditioned Verification (PCVR) audits recorded workflows post hoc. Together
they address intent alignment, contract admissibility, and
confirmatory evidence binding for registered cognitive-EEG
analyses.
We make three contributions.
1. Autonomous cognitive-EEG analysis agent. CogEEGAgent maps natural-language requests to registered
cognitive-EEG analyses and runs contract-bound MNEPython workflows from prepared epochs to evidencelinked reports.
2. Separation of semantic and scientific authority. The
LLM selects a semantic route, while the scientific harness uses typed contracts, durable commitment, hidden
confirmation, independent replay, and evidence binding
to govern execution and release.
3. Prospective boundary evaluation. Prespecified studies
test semantic choice, participant-disjoint execution, policy behavior, and fail-closed release.
Code and resources
https://github.com/dengzhe-hou/CogEEGAgent

3

1 CogEEGAgent
Semantic choice · deterministic scientific authority

21-case campaign · 3 ERP releases
Compare error vs. correct (ERN)
error
correct

Safe
abstention

Semantic route
(a, t, r)
Request + LLM choice
capabilities
2A Post-hoc PCVR audit

End-to-End Cases

Preflight Materialize
guards

Validated
contract

ERN · 0–100 ms · t=−4.59 · p=.0025

2B Scientific Control Plane

Compare semantic congruity (N400)
incongruent
congruent

Frozen contract · participant-disjoint split
Discovery executor

Hidden confirmation

9 frozen
candidates

Open + test once

N400 · 300–500 ms · t=−3.09 · p=.0130

Bounded LLM
selects 1

Replay +
falsification

Compare deviant/standard (MMN)
deviant
standard

Commit +
hashes

Release / abstain
evidence-bound

MMN · 150–250 ms · t=−5.17 · p=.000065

Recorded MNE trace → PCVR
Valid nulls
preserved
Invalid numerics
bounded repair
Validity, not effect

Figure 1: CogEEGAgent separates bounded semantic routing from deterministic scientific authority. Post-hoc PCVR audits
recorded workflows; the prospective Scientific Control Plane commits an LLM-selected candidate before participant-disjoint
confirmation and binds replayed evidence to release. The right column shows three supported composed-campaign releases;
request text is abbreviated, traces are schematic, and statistics are rounded held-out confirmation results.

2

Related Work

Scientific-analysis agents. LLM agents automate general
and domain-specific scientific workflows (Lu et al. 2024;
Ding and Do 2025; Sun et al. 2026; Jiao et al. 2026; Bai
et al. 2026; Wu et al. 2026). EEGAgent, NeuroWeaver, EEGGPT, and BrainAgent report complementary capabilities in
EEG tool orchestration, constrained pipeline search, classification and interpretation, and hierarchical brain-signal workflows (Zhao et al. 2025; Wang et al. 2026; Kim, Alaa, and
Bernardo 2024; Zhou et al. 2026); EEG-to-text work provides another interpretation interface (Jo et al. 2024). Their
reported evaluations emphasize task performance, completion, routing, or tool choice. Our EEG-specific scientific
harness adds two safeguards for cognitive-EEG inference.
It requires schema-valid inferential evidence for predefined
significance-result language and commits to an analysis before designated confirmation evidence is opened. NeuroAgent evaluates intent parsing, preprocessing-step correctness, and recovery within a multimodal Generate–Execute–
Validate workflow (Zhong et al. 2026), while curated skill
libraries address domain coverage (Wu et al. 2026). Together,
these lines of work motivate verification that complements
task-level performance.
Scientific-agent benchmarks increasingly execute generated programs or score long analyses rather than fluent reports (Chen et al. 2024; Mitchener et al. 2025). CogEEGBench adds cognitive-EEG failure injection, designed null
and sensitivity controls, and a workflow-level co-occurrence
check between predefined significance-result language and

schema-valid inferential evidence.
Verification and adaptive selection. Reasoning-state audits, external-claim corroboration, and static workflow-graph
checks address complementary consistency, source, and
topology failures (Yuan et al. 2026; Du et al. 2026; Xavier
et al. 2026). PCVR instead records a hard failure when predefined significance-result language lacks schema-valid inferential evidence while preserving legitimate nulls. That
remains insufficient after adaptive analysis. A genuine return
may still be the most favorable of several channel/window
choices, a workflow analogue of confirmation bias (Jhaveri
et al. 2026). Holdout reuse and adaptive-data validity are
established statistical concerns (Dwork et al. 2015). CogEEGAgent instead enforces an ordered, data-dependent
release condition. It commits one discovery result before
opening confirmation data, keeps the confirmation capability and result outside planner context, and compiles the final
claim from one typed return. Our contribution operationalizes established sample-splitting and multiple-testing policies through executable trace–partition–evidence binding in
an agent workflow. Bonferroni and max-T serve as policy
comparators.

3
3.1

CogEEGAgent

Overview

CogEEGAgent combines an LLM-based semantic router
with an EEG-specific scientific harness that governs deterministic execution, verification, and evidence-bound re-

lease. Scientific Contracts connect model choice to deterministic execution. PCVR audits completed workflows,
whereas the Scientific Control Plane prospectively binds a selected discovery trace to hidden confirmation and evidencebound release through trace–partition–evidence binding. A
sealed campaign composes the interfaces for three registered ERP analyses, while matched studies isolate routing,
preflight, and group confirmation. The threat model treats
model routes and prose as untrusted while trusting the frozen
registry, deterministic executor, commitment ledger, and
source-frozen scorer. The Scientific Control Plane enforces
pre-commitment, one-time confirmation access, and typedevidence release with one bounded candidate-selection call
followed by deterministic stages. Figure 1 separates model
authority from harness authority; the supplementary material
gives detailed protocols and ablations.

3.2

Tool-Augmented Cognitive EEG Analysis

CogEEGAgent exposes operations from MNE-Python, a
standard open-source EEG/MEG analysis library (Gramfort
et al. 2013), through function-calling schemas with defined
inputs, outputs, preconditions, and diagnostics. Building on
MNE rather than reimplementing signal processing ensures
that recorded steps are real library operations. The LLM receives metadata, tool-returned scalars, and test results, never
raw samples; this limits both data exposure and the opportunity to narrate an effect directly from a waveform. Tools cover
filtering, ICA, re-referencing, event-locked epoching, condition averages, difference waves, spectral analysis, and statistical tests, including cluster-permutation inference (Maris and
Oostenveld 2007), two-sample t tests, and ANOVA. Automated rejection, component labeling, and periodic/aperiodic
spectral decomposition remain established specialized alternatives (Jas et al. 2017; Pion-Tonachini, Kreutz-Delgado, and
Makeig 2019; Donoghue et al. 2020); the agent composes
these specialized primitives into an auditable workflow.
A knowledge base supplies soft windows, regions, bands,
and contrasts for ten paradigms (P300, N170, ERN, N2pc,
N400, LRP, Motor, MMN, SSVEP, and Resting State). The
planner uses them as guidance and PCVR as F6 plausibility
checks. Neither layer prescribes an expected outcome, so
failure to find a component remains a valid null. The entries
follow ERP CORE (Kappenman et al. 2021) and standard
ERP practice (Luck 2014); paradigm- and subject-specific
hypotheses remain curator supplied, as illustrated by taskconstrained theta and within-subject frequency-topography
analyses (Hou et al. 2025; Zeng et al. 2026).

3.3

Paradigm-Conditioned Verification (PCVR)

PCVR applies five check classes to the recorded workflow.
Structural checks (F1, hard) enforce dependencies, such as
epoching before an ERP. Metadata checks (F2, hard) reject
execution or event errors and zero-trial conditions. Numerical checks (F3) make invalid or non-finite epoch and baseline
bounds, non-finite tool outputs, and fewer than five retained
trials hard failures; five to nine trials or rejection above 50%
are soft warnings. Paradigm-plausibility checks (F6, advisory) warn about choices such as a P300 window at 0–50 ms
without rejecting the workflow. Inferential and conclusion

checks (F4/F5) reject schema-invalid typed evidence and
record a hard failure when predefined result-language patterns lack matching evidence or contradict it. This free-text
PCVR audit is narrower than the prospective path, where the
deterministic Reporter binds a structured claim directly to
typed evidence. The frozen cross-model study predates the
success-aware F4 and uses its invocation-only predecessor.
A scientific null (p > α, F7) is legitimate and never repaired.
These gates operationalize core COBIDAS-MEEG (Pernet
et al. 2020) and BIDS-EEG (Pernet et al. 2019) reporting
fields.
NaN-Aware Verification. A statistical tool may return
NaN because too few trials survive, conditions are identical, or a numerical operation degenerates. Naïve verification
can misclassify this as a valid F7 null; NaN-aware PCVR
marks it as F3 instead. F3 triggers an executed repair, usually R2a, which relaxes the epoch-rejection threshold (500 to
1000 µV) before re-running epoching and the test. The loop
either obtains a numeric result or explicitly reports failure
rather than certifying a degenerate null. Because R2a retains
trials excluded by the stricter threshold, its completion gain
may trade signal quality for numerical completion.

3.4

Null-Preserving Repair

When a hard check fails, PCVR proposes typed repairs under an anti-confirmation-bias constraint. It tracks workflow
validity separately from effect evidence.
|{checks passed}|
,
|{all checks}|
seffect = f (p-value, cluster count).

svalidity =

(1)
(2)

A null can have seffect = 0 while remaining fully valid; repairs
must increase svalidity and may not optimize seffect .
Typed Repair Actions. Actions are reorder (R1), reparameterize (R2), relabel metadata (R3), substitute method
(R4), add a diagnostic (R5), revise the conclusion (R6), or
escalate (R7). Base PCVR executes only R6; R1–R5 remain
recommendations in its report and R7 requests human review. This conservative default changes reporting without
silently changing the analysis. NaN-aware PCVR additionally executes R2a and R4 after F3, with every execution
preserved in the trace. R6 rewrites conclusions to match
available evidence, but under the evaluated Qwen configuration it rarely downgrades an overclaim and more often
completes an under-reported result. Because R6 is shared by
both configurations, the multi-subject gain is attributable to
numerical reclassification and procedural re-analysis, chiefly
R2a.
Stopping Criteria. The loop stops when all hard checks
pass, no candidate improves validity, three iterations are exhausted, or cumulative effect change exceeds τ = 0.3; the
last condition halts immediately with a bias-risk warning and
fired in 10 multi-subject cases. Checks are deterministic; only
R6 calls the LLM. PCVR remains post hoc because it detects
but does not prevent adaptive selection. The separate Scientific Control Plane implements the pre-committed boundary
below.

3.5

Scientific Control Plane for Semantic Routing
and Bounded Execution

The prospective path has four stages. First, the LLM maps a
request to a three-field route (a, t, r) that names an action, a
registered template, and a registered reason. Second, deterministic code applies request guards and materializes a 15field Scientific Contract from the selected outcome-free catalogue entry. Guards can force abstention but never choose a
supported template. The contract fixes the estimand, ordered
conditions, participant unit, ROI/window, candidate family,
and release policy. The model therefore owns bounded semantic choice, while code owns contract materialization and
release.
Third, the runner irrevocably consumes the one-shot campaign before discovery. A deterministic executor then evaluates the frozen candidates, and the bounded Methodologist selects exactly one. The control plane checks the
frozen objective, atomically commits the choice together
with discovery-ledger and hidden-partition hashes, and only
then opens confirmation once. The model receives neither raw samples nor confirmation capabilities or outcomes.
Commitment ends model control, so callback, retry, repair,
and reselection are unavailable.
Finally, a deterministic Falsifier applies sign-flip and leaveone-participant-out probes, and the Reporter compiles estimates, uncertainty, provenance, and qualifiers from typed
evidence. Append-only events expose the release sequence
Registered → Consumed → DiscoveryDone → Selected
→ Committed → ConfirmationOpened
→ EvidenceBound → Released,
and a rejected transition terminates in Abstained. Algorithm 1 gives the executable path, while Table 1 maps failure modes to controls. Release requires finite, commitmentbound confirmation and falsification evidence with all hard
checks passed; the independent scorer subsequently replays
the trace. Under the stated trusted-boundary assumptions, a
released trace commits before single-use confirmation and
permits no post-commit model action. The supplementary
material gives the full conditional argument and assumptions.

4

Evaluation

The evaluation tests language-to-contract routing, composed participant-disjoint execution, and control of adaptiveselection error. Legacy CogEEGBench and cross-model
sweeps then diagnose execution-grounding failures across
models and configurations.

4.1

Language-to-Contract Routing

We prospectively sealed 60 designer-visible synthetic requests. Forty valid tasks cross ten registered cognitive-EEG
templates and four language forms; twenty require abstention for one of five reasons. Each request was evaluated under three fixed Qwen2.5-14B repeats. The matched anchor
is a frozen clause-aware, field-weighted BM25 router (FWBM25), inspired by BM25F (Robertson, Zaragoza, and Taylor 2004). Both systems receive the same public catalogue,

Algorithm 1 Contract-Bound Group-EEG Release
Require: Frozen contract K; sealed split P ; epochs X
1: if ¬ConsumeCampaignOnce(K, P ) return Abstained
2: (D, H, hH ) ← LoadSealedPartitions(K, P, X)
3: CD ← ExecuteAllCandidates(K, D)
4: s ← BoundedMethodologistSelect(K, CD )
5: if s is absent or not the frozen-objective selection then
6:
return Abstained
7: end if
8: if ¬AtomicCommit(K, s, hash(CD ), hH ) return Abstained
9: Close model authority after commitment
10: E ← OpenOnceAndGroupConfirm(K, s, H)
11: F ← SignFlipAndLeaveOneOut(K, s, E)
12: if ¬ReleaseGate(K, s, E, F ) then
13:
return Abstained
14: end if

15: return Released CompileReport(K, s, E, F )

Failure mode

Control or owner

Field invention/drift

Three-field route;
Exact
registry materialization
Frozen request-level
Abstain
preflight
Objective check; atomic Abstain
commit
Hidden capability; one Zero/once
executor
Independent scorer;
Exact
typed report

Mechanical invalidity
Post-search reselection
Partition leak/reuse
Numeric/claim drift

Semantic/scope mismatch Benchmark; curator
responsibility

Outcome

Disclose

Table 1: Safeguards and trust boundary in the Scientific
Control Plane. Deterministic stages own safety-critical transitions; semantic fit remains outside deterministic enforcement.

capabilities, and deterministic preflight, but no EEG samples
or outcomes. The unique request is the inferential unit; repeats assess stability. Full protocol and arm-level diagnostics
are supplementary.
Across 40 unique valid requests, Table 2 shows 39 exact
LLM routes versus 33 for FW-BM25. The prespecified bootstrap difference is 15.0 points (95% CI, 2.5–28.6), while the
exact paired test gives p = .070. Identical repeat decisions
yield 117/120 versus 99/120. A trained TF–IDF comparator
reaches 34/40, and a template-block interval crosses zero,
so the advantage is descriptive and corpus-specific. The sole
LLM error maps a compositional MMN request to ERN,
an internally consistent mismatch that preflight cannot detect. Shared preflight makes both systems abstain on every
required-abstention request.
Deterministic boundary coverage. Full preflight blocks
all 200 internally inconsistent contract mutations but accepts
all 40 internally consistent wrong-template substitutions,
confirming that consistency alone cannot recover linguistic
intent. A source-frozen runtime matrix matches the prespecified terminal state, executor-call count, and release deci-

Valid exact
Arm

Abstain

Unique Repeats Exact / released

LLM+PF
39/40 117/120
FW-BM25+PF 33/40 99/120

60/60 / 0/60
60/60 / 0/60

Table 2: Prespecified routing benchmark. Valid exact reports
registered-analysis matches at unique-request and threerepeat levels. For abstention-required requests, the final column reports exact abstentions / released contracts. PF denotes
the shared deterministic preflight; the CogEEGAgent arm is
bolded.
Request stratum

Cases Exact Released

Supported analyses
Designated underspecified
Guarded preflight hazards
Post-release reuse or retry

3
3
12
3

3
0
12
3

3
0
0
0

All

21

18

3

Table 3: Externally model-authored, outcome-blind composed campaign. Exact counts semantically correct terminal
actions; Released counts emitted reports, expected only for
supported analyses.

sion in 20/20 cases spanning malformed selections, hiddenconfirmation access, retry, partition reuse, file drift, and evidence mutation. A separate public-verifier matrix matches
exact hard-failure outcomes in 188/188 scalar, cluster, nocall, malformed-value, contradiction, and evidence-binding
cases. These matrices exercise the enumerated deterministic boundary; semantic fit remains the model and curator
responsibility.

4.2

Composed Language-to-Report Campaign

We evaluate the language-to-report path using 21 outcomeblind requests written by an external model and participantdisjoint EEG data. Runtime receives only opaque identifiers,
request text, and public capabilities; the independent scorer
loads sealed gold only after the model server stops.
The source seal also binds the participant assignment,
model revision, code, runtime manifest, scorer-only gold,
and all thresholds. Runtime cannot access request classes,
target contracts, expected terminal actions, or scorer labels.
The scorer opens these records only after every model call
has ended, separating online execution from correctness adjudication.
Table 3 reports 18/21 exact terminal actions. The three
misses are underspecified requests for which the LLM selects
an already reserved supported contract instead of abstaining.
Lifecycle enforcement prevents release, but this containment
depends on the frozen ordering.
All three supported requests release participant-disjoint
ERN, N400, and MMN reports. Each selection passes the
11 release checks, independent replay, and falsification, and
confirmation opens once with no monitored post-commit
model action. The respective discovery/confirmation partic-

Policy

Directional power
FPR↓ d = .35 d = .65 d = 1.0

Fixed
Best-p
Bonferroni
max-T
Held-out split

5.0
16.5
2.0
5.1
4.9

20.6
56.9
23.9
36.1
20.8

47.2
95.2
82.2
89.9
67.9

67.9
99.7
98.8
99.7
95.2

Table 4: Adaptive-search stress test. Entries are subjectmacro percentages averaged across P3 and N170. FPR is
conditional within the included recordings; directional power
requires detection in the injected direction. Policies compare
fixed analysis, uncorrected best-p, Bonferroni, max-T , and
held-out confirmation. The control plane’s held-out policy is
bolded.

ipant counts are 8/8, 10/10, and 19/19. Held-out tests reproduce the registered directions at t = −4.589, −3.087, and
−5.169. Sign-flip tests remain significant, and every leaveone-participant-out fit preserves direction and significance.
Figure 1 shows these held-out results; full statistics and strictauthoring sensitivity are supplementary.

4.3

Selection-Aware Confirmation Boundary

This experiment isolates statistical policy from the LLM and
registry. For 20 ERP CORE participants, the frozen families
contain 9 P3 and 12 N170 ROI–window candidates. Five
policies see the same draws. They are fixed analysis, unadjusted best-p, Bonferroni, permutation max-T , and held-out
selection. Null trials use label permutation, while power trials inject effects at balanced candidate locations. Held-out
selection chooses on a stratified discovery half and tests once
on disjoint confirmation trials. The artifact contains 100,000
paired logical repetitions; subject-cluster intervals preserve
participant dependence. Full simulation parameters are supplementary.
Table 4 shows that uncorrected best-p search raises false
positives to 16.5%. Held-out confirmation reduces this by
11.6 points (95% subject-cluster CI, 11.0–12.1) to 4.9%,
while improving power over fixed analysis when effect location varies. Max-T retains higher power and remains preferable when the complete search is trustworthy and replayable.
Held-out confirmation instead provides an auditable, failclosed option when that history cannot be trusted.

4.4

Legacy CogEEGBench Diagnostics

Scope and metrics. Legacy CogEEGBench contains 50
tasks across ERN, P300, and Motor datasets (Kappenman
et al. 2021; Gramfort et al. 2013; Schalk et al. 2004). It combines injected workflow failures, null and suggestive-null
contrasts, and known-effect controls. Five Qwen configurations produce 3,100 runs. Completion and overclaim are textand-workflow proxies; designed-GT accuracy checks only
significance direction on 15 null and two known-effect task
types. Task composition, model settings, and run accounting
are supplementary.

Grounding and base benchmark. Across the SHApinned canonical logs, all 235 significance-flagged conclusions co-occur with an error-free significant return. This
detector-level result checks successful-return co-occurrence,
whereas the prospective path binds contrast, window, direction, and value. Standard PCVR is otherwise nearly inert in
this conservative-model regime. Completion remains 85.6–
87.9%, and the main configurations obtain the same 33/33
designed directions. Detailed scope exclusions, per-paradigm
results, and the internal one-rater diagnostic are supplementary.
Conditional findings. A query-independent script reaches
15/17 designed directions versus 17/17 for CogEEGAgent,
showing a modest task-specific advantage rather than broad
superiority. Qwen-7B completes only 13%, indicating orchestration failure at smaller scale. On matched Motor
data, NaN-aware PCVR improves mean completion but not
subject-level significance and retains trials excluded by the
stricter threshold. We interpret this as numerical robustness with a possible signal-quality trade-off (Delorme 2023),
not improved scientific correctness. Temperature, suggestiveprompt, and auxiliary-paradigm results are supplementary.

4.5

Cross-Model Failure Modes in Invocation and
Completion

Across six open models, completion, invocation, and successful return diverge. Qwen-32B obtains finite statistical
returns on 46/50 tasks and makes no positive no-call significance claim. Mistral invokes no statistical tool yet makes such
a claim on 46/50 while scoring “100%” completion; Granite,
InternLM, and Phi show the same mode. Withholding tools
also induces no-call claims in Qwen, so both tool access
and model behavior matter. Qwen2.5 14B is the smallest
tested model with substantial invocation and demonstrates
single-GPU feasibility. Detailed counts and audits are supplementary.

4.6

Implications for Scientific Agent Design

The primary prospective results are summarized in Figure 2. On the prespecified routing benchmark, Qwen correctly routes 39/40 unique valid requests, compared with
33/40 for the matched FW-BM25 anchor. The systematic
MMN-to-ERN error, three underspecification misses, and
constructed wrong-template releases identify semantic abstention and intent validation as the unresolved model-facing
failures. The control-plane path then materializes, executes,
and releases registered analyses under deterministic controls;
the mutation, runtime, and verifier matrices exercise its enforcement scope.
Together, the prospective studies form a connected evidence chain. The routing benchmark isolates language-tocontract choice under matched preflight. The composed campaign carries selected contracts through participant-disjoint
discovery and confirmation, durable commitment, independent replay, falsification, and evidence-linked reporting. The
policy study quantifies the statistical value of this boundary, and the fault matrices exercise its deterministic transitions. Each stage yields a distinct observable spanning

semantic choice, contract validity, commitment order, evidence lineage, and terminal release. This sequence provides
a direct path from natural-language intent to a reproducible
cognitive-EEG report.
The group campaign exercises the complete commitment–
confirmation–falsification–report path. Exact argmax reproduces its candidate selections, locating the LLM’s distinctive contribution in language-conditioned contract routing.
Policy stress testing motivates the confirmation boundary.
Max-T is preferred when the complete adaptive search is
trustworthy and replayable, while held-out confirmation provides an auditable alternative when it is not.
The combined LLM and harness architecture uses model
flexibility where cognitive-EEG requests vary linguistically.
Component descriptions, ordered contrasts, spatiotemporal
constraints, and distractors must be mapped to one registered analysis before execution. The matched routing study
exercises this role beyond lexical retrieval, while fixed contracts make the resulting decisions comparable and auditable.
The harness preserves language-conditioned selection without delegating confirmation access or claim construction to
the model. Explicit route and release interfaces also make
the architecture modular. Model revisions can be evaluated
against the same contracts, and scientific executors can be
extended while retaining commitment and evidence-lineage
semantics. This separation gives each improvement a clear
target. Model and catalogue updates address semantic coverage, while deterministic controls extend admissibility and
release assurance.
Three design principles follow. Evaluation should distinguish completion, invocation, successful return, semantic correctness, and contract-valid release; every model arm
should receive the same deterministic harness; and the trust
perimeter should be explicit. The model handles bounded
semantic choice, while deterministic stages own data access,
materialization, commitment, inference, falsification, and reporting. Curators own the scientific question, preprocessing,
registered catalogue, prior-access control, and generalization
design.
Beyond a workflow engine. Trace–partition–evidence
binding extends schema validation, preregistration, and
workflow ordering by connecting an untrusted model’s selected discovery trace to one subsequently opened partition
and the final scientific claim. Each stage is represented by
a durable registry event or hash-bound journal record, and
a candidate release becomes formal after the source-frozen
scorer independently replays the bound evidence. Within the
implemented release API and declared trusted-component
assumptions, the terminal scorer enforces commitment order, single-use confirmation, post-commit non-interference,
and evidence lineage. The resulting trace-relative guarantee
binds the registered contract, selected discovery identifier,
commitment, partition digest, typed evidence, and compiled
claim. Semantic fit and scientific optimality remain declared
curator responsibilities. These interfaces can wrap other registered scientific executors; this paper instantiates them for
cognitive EEG.

(a) Semantic routing
39/40

LLM
TF–IDF

34/40

FW-BM25

33/40
Exact routing accuracy

(b) Composed campaign
3 release
15 correct nonrelease

FPR (%)

3 semantic miss
18/21 exact terminal actions

4.8

(c) False-positive control
16.5
15

The evaluation is scoped along four dimensions. First, routing is single-turn, closed-set, synthetic, and designer-visible.
The composed campaign adds outcome-blind external phrasing from curator-defined intents, while implementation was
finalized after the wording was visible and containment
of the underspecified requests depends on frozen ordering. These experiments use familiar pre-loaded data, leaving
independent-human intent, unseen cohorts, and deployment
performance open. Second, CogEEGBench mainly uses text
proxies and designed directions, the one-rater diagnostic is
internal, and F4 recognizes predefined result-language patterns; the frozen cross-model runs use invocation-only F4,
whereas the shipped verifier is schema-valid and successaware. Third, cross-model initiation depends on prompting
and serving, and replicate labels are distinct from sampler
seeds. Fourth, the routing comparison is descriptive (exact
paired p = .070; template-block interval crosses zero), and
the policy stress test estimates conditional behavior within
the included recordings. Curator-selected preprocessing and
registered candidate families remain part of the trusted scientific boundary.

10

5.1

4.9

max-T

Held-out

5

5%

0
Best-p

Figure 2: Prospective evidence. (a) Exact route accuracy.
(b) Terminal outcomes in the 21-case composed campaign.
(c) False-positive rates under adaptive selection; the dashed
line marks 5%. The three semantic misses in (b) terminate
without release.

4.7

linguistic interpretation ends and deterministic scientific authority begins.
The same design can wrap another scientific executor
when three interfaces are available. It requires a finite public
catalogue of admissible analyses, typed deterministic tool
returns, and a resource that can be reserved for confirmation.
New models can then be compared under the same contracts,
while new executors can retain commitment and evidencelineage semantics. Domains without a separable confirmation resource can still use the post-hoc audit path, but not
the prospective selection-aware guarantee. These interfaces
define the architectural requirements for reuse. Empirical
validation in other scientific domains remains future work.

Practical Use and Transfer

CogEEGAgent is designed for prepared cognitive-EEG data
and a curator-approved analysis catalogue. Before use, the
curator registers the scientific estimand, ordered conditions,
analysis unit, admissible ROI/window family, candidateselection rule, and confirmation policy. At runtime, a user
supplies a natural-language request rather than a full pipeline
specification. The model maps that request to a registered
analysis or abstention, and the harness returns either no release or a receipt that links the contract, commitment, confirmation evidence, qualifiers, and compiled report. This division makes a released result reviewable without requiring
the reviewer to trust the model’s prose or hidden state.
Illustrative workflow. Suppose a user asks whether error trials elicit a larger response than correct trials. The
router identifies the registered ERN contrast and emits a
compact semantic route. Preflight materializes the contract,
checks the ordered conditions and registered bounds, and
binds the sealed participant-disjoint assignment. The discovery executor evaluates the frozen ROI–window candidates.
The bounded Methodologist returns one candidate ID, after
which its choice and discovery trace are committed. Only
then does the confirmation executor open the hidden partition, compute the prespecified group test, run falsification
probes, and compile a report with hashes and qualifiers. The
user receives either that report with its receipt or an abstention naming the failed control. This workflow shows where

Limitations

5

Conclusion

We presented CogEEGAgent, which separates LLM semantic routing from deterministic scientific authority. On the
prespecified routing benchmark, its router yields 39/40 exact
unique-request contracts versus 33/40 for a matched lexical
anchor. Matched preflight prevents release of every benchmark request requiring abstention. The externally modelauthored campaign releases all three supported participantdisjoint analyses and identifies underspecified-request abstention as the remaining routing error, while lifecycle controls prevent release in the frozen campaign. Held-out confirmation curbs adaptive-search risk when search history cannot be trusted or replayed. These results support bounded
cognitive-EEG automation with LLM intent interpretation
and deterministic execution and release. The interfaces also
support controlled comparisons across model revisions.

References
Bai, J.; Aldossary, A.; Swanick, T.; et al. 2026. El Agente
Gráfico: Structured Execution Graphs for Scientific Agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.17902.
Botvinik-Nezer, R.; Holzmeister, F.; Camerer, C. F.; Dreber,
A.; Huber, J.; Johannesson, M.; Kirchler, M.; Iwanir, R.;
Mumford, J. A.; Adcock, R. A.; et al. 2020. Variability in
the analysis of a single neuroimaging dataset by many teams.
Nature, 582(7810): 84–88.
Chen, Z.; Chen, S.; Ning, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, B.; Yu, B.; Li,
Y.; Liao, Z.; Wei, C.; Lu, Z.; Dey, V.; Xue, M.; Baker, F. N.;
Burns, B.; Adu-Ampratwum, D.; Huang, X.; Ning, X.; Gao,
S.; Su, Y.; and Sun, H. 2024. ScienceAgentBench: Toward
Rigorous Assessment of Language Agents for Data-Driven
Scientific Discovery. arXiv:2410.05080.
Delorme, A. 2021. OpenNeuro dataset ds003061 (auditory
oddball, EEG).
Delorme, A. 2023. EEG is better left alone. Scientific Reports, 13(1): 2372.
Ding, L.; and Do, C. 2025. SasAgent: Multi-Agent AI System
for Small-Angle Scattering Data Analysis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.05363.
Donoghue, T.; Haller, M.; Peterson, E. J.; Varma, P.; Sebastian, P.; Gao, R.; Noto, T.; Lara, A. H.; Wallis, J. D.;
Knight, R. T.; Shestyuk, A.; and Voytek, B. 2020. Parameterizing neural power spectra into periodic and aperiodic
components. Nature Neuroscience, 23(12): 1655–1665.
Du, Y.; Dinh, M.; Zhang, K.; and Li, N. 2026. AutoVerifier:
An Agentic Automated Verification Framework Using Large
Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02617.
Dwork, C.; Feldman, V.; Hardt, M.; Pitassi, T.; Reingold,
O.; and Roth, A. 2015. The Reusable Holdout: Preserving
Validity in Adaptive Data Analysis. Science, 349(6248):
636–638.
Gramfort, A.; Luessi, M.; Larson, E.; Engemann, D. A.;
Strohmeier, D.; Brodbeck, C.; Goj, R.; Jas, M.; Brooks, T.;
Parkkonen, L.; et al. 2013. MEG and EEG Data Analysis
with MNE-Python. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 7: 267.
Hou, D.; Sun, S.; Hatori, Y.; Tseng, C.-h.; and Shioiri, S.
2025. Task-constrained self-initiated attention shifts are indexed by frontal-midline theta ramping. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 19: 1708257.
Hou, D.; Wu, Z.; Jiang, L.; Li, Z.; Lin, F.; and Yamada,
K. D. 2026. Same Brain, Different Prediction: How Preprocessing Choices Undermine EEG Decoding Reliability.
arXiv:2605.07212.
Jas, M.; Engemann, D. A.; Bekhti, Y.; Raimondo, F.; and
Gramfort, A. 2017. Autoreject: Automated artifact rejection
for MEG and EEG data. NeuroImage, 159: 417–429.
Jhaveri, A. R.; GX-Chen, A.; Sucholutsky, I.; and Choi,
E. 2026. Failing to Falsify: Evaluating and Mitigating
Confirmation Bias in Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.02485.
Jiao, J.; Liu, T.; Li, K.; Song, W.; Liao, Y.; Zhang, B.; Liu,
B.; Yuan, C.-Z.; and Sun, Y. 2026. HepScript: A Dual-Use

DSL for Human-AI Collaborative Data Analysis Workflows
in High-Energy Physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.01423.
Jo, H.; Yang, Y.; Han, J.; Duan, Y.; Xiong, H.; and
Lee, W. H. 2024. Are EEG-to-Text Models Working?
arXiv:2405.06459.
Kappenman, E. S.; Farrens, J. L.; Zhang, W.; Stewart, A. X.;
and Luck, S. J. 2021. ERP CORE: An Open Resource for
Human Event-Related Potential Research. NeuroImage, 225:
117465.
Kim, J. W.; Alaa, A.; and Bernardo, D. 2024. EEG-GPT:
Exploring Capabilities of Large Language Models for EEG
Classification and Interpretation. arXiv:2401.18006.
Lu, C.; Lu, C.; Lange, R. T.; Foerster, J.; Clune, J.; and
Ha, D. 2024. The AI Scientist: Towards Fully Automated Open-Ended Scientific Discovery. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.06292.
Luck, S. J. 2014. An Introduction to the Event-Related Potential Technique. MIT Press, 2nd edition.
Maris, E.; and Oostenveld, R. 2007. Nonparametric statistical
testing of EEG- and MEG-data. Journal of Neuroscience
Methods, 164(1): 177–190.
Mitchener, L.; Laurent, J. M.; Andonian, A.; Tenmann, B.;
Narayanan, S.; Wellawatte, G. P.; White, A.; Sani, L.; and
Rodriques, S. G. 2025. BixBench: a Comprehensive Benchmark for LLM-based Agents in Computational Biology.
arXiv:2503.00096.
Nakanishi, M.; Wang, Y.; Wang, Y.-T.; and Jung, T.-P. 2015.
A Comparison Study of Canonical Correlation Analysis
Based Methods for Detecting Steady-State Visual Evoked
Potentials. PLOS ONE, 10(10): e0140703.
Pernet, C.; Garrido, M. I.; Gramfort, A.; Maurits, N.; Michel,
C. M.; Pang, E.; Salmelin, R.; Schoffelen, J. M.; ValdesSosa, P. A.; and Puce, A. 2020. Issues and recommendations from the OHBM COBIDAS MEEG committee for reproducible EEG and MEG research. Nature Neuroscience,
23(12): 1473–1483.
Pernet, C. R.; Appelhoff, S.; Gorgolewski, K. J.; Flandin, G.;
Phillips, C.; Delorme, A.; and Oostenveld, R. 2019. EEGBIDS, an extension to the brain imaging data structure for
electroencephalography. Scientific Data, 6(1): 103.
Pion-Tonachini, L.; Kreutz-Delgado, K.; and Makeig, S.
2019. ICLabel: An automated electroencephalographic independent component classifier, dataset, and website. NeuroImage, 198: 181–197.
Robertson, S. E.; Zaragoza, H.; and Taylor, M. J. 2004. Simple BM25 Extension to Multiple Weighted Fields. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM CIKM International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management, 42–49. ACM.
Schalk, G.; McFarland, D. J.; Hinterberger, T.; Birbaumer,
N.; and Wolpaw, J. R. 2004. BCI2000: A General-Purpose
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) System. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, 51(6): 1034–1043.
Sun, J.; Lenz, D.; Peterka, T.; and Yu, H. 2026. SASAV:
Self-Directed Agent for Scientific Analysis and Visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.03406.

Wang, G.; Yang, S.; Ding, J.-E.; and Liu, F. 2026. NeuroWeaver: An Autonomous Evolutionary Agent for Exploring the Programmatic Space of EEG Analysis Pipelines.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.13473.
Wu, Z.; Xu, S.; Chen, B.; Wan, S.; Li, Y.; Ruan, W.; Lyu, Y.;
Li, S.; Zhu, D.; Liu, T.; and Zhao, L. 2026. Vibe Medicine:
Redefining Biomedical Research Through Human-AI CoWork. arXiv:2604.23674.
Xavier, M.; Vaisakh M A; Jolly, M.; and Xavier, M. 2026.
Agentproof: Static Verification of Agent Workflow Graphs.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.20356.
Yuan, W.; Lin, C.; Chen, J.; Xu, J.; Wang, X.; and Ngai, E.
C. H. 2026. Verify Before You Commit: Towards Faithful
Reasoning in LLM Agents via Self-Auditing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.08401.
Zeng, Y.; Hou, D.; Zhang, Z.; Sun, S.; Huang, Y.; Tseng, C.h.; and Shioiri, S. 2026. Subject-Specific Analysis of SelfInitiated Attention Shifts from EEG with Controlled Internal
and External Attention Conditions. arXiv:2605.18251.
Zhao, S.; Peng, M.; Jiang, H.; Li, T.; Li, S.; and Pan, G.
2025. EEGAgent: A Unified Framework for Automated
EEG Analysis Using Large Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.09947.
Zhong, L.; Xia, Y.; Zhang, J.; Huang, S.; Yue, J.; Xia, M.;
and Shi, Y. 2026. NeuroAgent: LLM Agents for Multimodal Neuroimaging Analysis and Research. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2605.06584.
Zhou, Y.; Zhao, S.; Wang, J.; Li, S.; and Pan, G. 2026.
BrainAgent: A Large Language Model-Driven Multi-Agent
Framework for Autonomous Brain Signal Understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.25400.

Supplementary Material

Request class

Reading guide. The supplementary evidence follows the
main-paper argument. Section A defines the executable release property. Sections B–D report the composed campaign,
semantic routing, and selection policy. Section E tests deterministic enforcement by fault injection. The remaining sections preserve predecessor campaigns, legacy diagnostics,
run accounting, and implementation details. Readers focused
on the primary evidence can follow Sections A–E in order.
Terminology. CogEEGAgent combines an LLM-based semantic router with an EEG-specific scientific harness for
deterministic execution, verification, and evidence-bound release. Scientific Contracts connect model choice to deterministic execution. Paradigm-Conditioned Verification (PCVR)
audits completed workflows, whereas the Scientific Control
Plane prospectively binds discovery, confirmation, and release through trace–partition–evidence binding. No new human data were collected, and raw public EEG remains at its
source repositories under the original terms.

A

Executable Release State Machine

The prospective path is audited as the sequence
Registered → Consumed → DiscoveryDone
→ Selected → Committed → ConfirmationOpened
→ EvidenceBound → Released.
These labels are event predicates reconstructed from the oneshot registry and hash-bound run journal; a candidate release
becomes formal only when the source-frozen scorer accepts
the trace. Any rejected transition instead terminates in Abstained. Model routes and prose are untrusted. The proposition below assumes that the frozen registry and validator,
deterministic executor and Reporter, atomic commitment
ledger, exclusive confirmation opener, and source-frozen
scorer behave as specified. Curator choices, compromised
code, and scientific information seen before sealing remain
outside this trusted boundary.
Conditional release-safety argument. Under these assumptions, every trace ending in Released satisfies five
executable properties. First, the durable Committed event
precedes ConfirmationOpened. Second, exactly one confirmation opening is bound to the consumed campaign. Third,
no model call, retry, repair, or reselection occurs after commitment. Fourth, the typed evidence and compiled report are
hash-linked to the contract, selected candidate, committed
partition, and successful finite return. Fifth, a failed schema,
objective, hash, replay, or transition guard prevents release.
Proof sketch and scope. Committed is reachable only after contract validation and frozen-objective selection. The
atomic ledger both records the selection and consumes its
campaign; the opener accepts only that unconsumed record
and records its sole opening. Later states reject model-action
events. EvidenceBound requires a successful finite return
and independent replay whose identifiers and hashes match
the contract and commitment. The Reporter accepts only

Cases Exact Released

Supported analysis
Policy-designated underspecified
Unsupported template
Same condition
Reversed condition order
Confirmation seeking
Post-release reuse or retry

3
3
3
3
3
3
3

3
0
3
3
3
3
3

3
0
0
0
0
0
0

All

21

18

3

Table 5: Externally model-authored, outcome-blind composed campaign. Exact counts semantically correct terminal
actions; Released counts emitted reports, expected only for
supported analyses.
this bound evidence, and the terminal scorer rejects any mismatch. Thus a released trace has the five properties by transition construction. The argument establishes implementationlevel release safety under the stated assumptions; semantic intent and scientific optimality remain curator-governed
properties.

B

Prospective Contract-Bound Group-EEG
Campaigns

We present the current externally model-authored composed
campaign and its participant-disjoint scientific releases. Predecessor protocols and revision history are preserved later.

B.1

Externally Model-Authored Composed Safety
Campaign

A separate external-model session produced 21 request realizations from curator-defined intent cards in one unedited
first response. The service displayed Claude Fable 5 at send
time and reported an automatic pre-stream fallback to Claude
Opus 4.8; the de-identified provenance records this operatorobserved metadata. The session received no EEG outcomes,
CogEEGAgent outputs, registry identifiers, or prior request
wording, although it had high-level design context; accountlevel memory status was unavailable for verification. The primary analysis retains all 21 requests. A prespecified strictauthoring sensitivity excludes one retained wording deviation that names “unexpected sounds.” Because implementation was finalized after the wording was visible, the campaign
evaluates outcome-blind external phrasing from fixed curator
intents.
The source seal binds the request response, public capabilities, participant assignment, model revision, code, runtime
manifest, scorer-only gold, and all thresholds. Runtime receives opaque identifiers, request text, public capabilities,
and fixed seeds. It does not receive original request classes,
target contracts, expected actions, or scorer labels. After all
model calls stop, the independent scorer loads the separately sealed gold manifest. The seal, runtime, and scorergold SHA256 prefixes are 35e97150, ec2b7af7, and
37c723c4.
Table 5 shows 18/21 exact terminal actions under the
frozen primary analysis and 18/20 under the strict-authoring

Component D/C Selection
ERN
N400
MMN

t

p

8/8 Midline canonical −4.589
.00252
10/10 Midline CP early −3.087
.01298
19/19 Frontocentral late −5.169 .0000645

Table 6: Scientific subcampaign. D/C gives disjoint discovery
and confirmation participant counts. Every selection is the
frozen discovery-objective maximizer. The reported t and p
are nominal two-sided one-sample confirmation tests.
sensitivity. On each policy-designated underspecified request, Qwen compiles the corresponding valid ERN, N400,
or MMN contract rather than returning the expected
underspecified abstention. Because the three contracts were already reserved by the preceding supported requests, lifecycle enforcement rejects each duplicate. All 18
nonrelease-required requests therefore end without release
in this frozen ordering, but the three misses are not correct semantic abstentions and the containment is not orderinvariant. The composed correctness report SHA256 begins
befd1d18.
All three supported analyses in Table 6 satisfy the preregistered scientific release criteria. They release participantdisjoint reports, select the frozen objective maximum, and
pass 11/11 checks for contract validity, commitment, one
confirmation opening, independent numerical replay, falsification, monitored access, and report binding. Sign-flip pvalues are .00733, .01525, and .0000200, and every leaveone-participant-out fit preserves direction and significance.
Figure 3 visualizes the frozen confirmation contrasts. The
run uses six routing calls and three selection calls, with no
post-commit or post-release model call and no monitored
confirmation leak. Its group correctness report SHA256 begins 0e159183.

C

Prospective Scientific Control Plane for
Semantic Routing and Contract
Compilation

This single-turn component study isolates semantic routing
and preflight within the Scientific Control Plane. It is distinct from both CogEEGBench and the group-EEG campaign. Before formal calls, we froze 60 unique designervisible synthetic requests, the Qwen2.5-14B revision and
sampler, three seeds, both task manifests, source and environment hashes, a one-shot registry, the independent scorer,
the clause-aware, field-weighted BM25 router (FW-BM25),
inspired by BM25F (Robertson, Zaragoza, and Taylor 2004),
and all decision thresholds.
FW-BM25 pools field-weighted pseudo-term frequencies
and pseudo-document lengths before one BM25 saturation. Clause filtering, unigram/bigram tokenization, phrase
bonuses, and the frozen margin rule are study-specific additions. Forty valid requests cross ten registered templates and
four linguistic strata. Twenty required-abstention requests
cover forbidden-confirmation, unsupported-template, samecondition, missing-condition, and underspecified cases.
Each task–seed pair has one native-schema call and one

Stratum
Explicit
Paraphrase
Compositional
Distractor
Total

LLM+preflight FW-BM25+preflight
30/30
30/30
27/30
30/30

30/30
21/30
27/30
21/30

117/120

99/120

Table 7: Valid semantic routing by linguistic stratum. Counts
are task–seed records; each row contains ten unique tasks and
three seeds. The primary interval clusters the three replicates
by task.

separate prompt-only call at the same seed, giving 180
records and 360 model calls. FW-BM25 and both constructed controls make no model calls. The model sees no
EEG samples or outcomes and no sealed gold decision, action, or template. It does see public capabilities, including
confirmation_partition_available.
The native function requires exactly three strings,
action, template_id, and reason_code, with none
as the inactive sentinel. Deterministic code uses the selected
public catalogue row and admissible ordered condition pair
to materialize the 15-field contract. The model never emits
that full contract. Native-schema scoring checks native transport, exact keys, enums, and materialization.
The full control-plane preflight first applies five fixed
public-input guards. These include frozen phrase rules and
a clause-aware FW-BM25 check only for uniquely requested
unsupported templates. It then validates relationships, capabilities, query grounding, prepared inputs, and the confirmation boundary. It never deterministically selects the template
for a valid supported request. Prompt-only receives the same
three-field response contract as JSON. FW-BM25 sees the
identical public catalogue and capabilities and passes through
the identical full preflight.
The prespecified routing criterion was met. Table 7 shows
a difference of 15.0 percentage points and a 10,000-resample
paired 95% task-cluster CI of 2.5–28.57 points. The bootstrap resamples all 60 task identities and computes the validtask contrast inside each resample. At unique-task level,
32 valid tasks are correct for both systems, seven only for
LLM+preflight, one only for FW-BM25+preflight, and none
wrong for both. The report-only ten-template-block sensitivity interval is −2.5 to 35.0 points and quantifies corpus-level
template variation. All full-preflight decisions are identical
across the three seeds; native-schema decisions vary on two
required-abstention tasks. The only LLM+preflight error is
one MMN compositional task mapped to ERN under all
seeds (three records); prompt-only maps that same task correctly. The full validator releases this internally consistent
wrong template, as its declared boundary predicts.
A retrospective comparator audit fits a word-and-character
TF–IDF linear classifier on 40 separate development queries
before loading any formal record or gold label. Exact-string
overlap with the formal queries is zero, inference receives
only the query and public capabilities, and all routers use
the same preflight. Both splits share the same designer and

Difference (microvolts)

ERN error - correct

2

5

0.0
−0.5

−2

−5
Fz/FCz/Cz; n=8
-5.31 [-8.05, -2.58]

−200

−4

0
200
400
Time (ms)
Confirmation contrast

MMN deviant - standard
0.5

0

0

−10

N400 unrelated - related

−1.0
Cz/CPz/Pz; n=10
-2.22 [-3.84, -0.59]
0

−1.5

200
400
600
Time (ms)
Pointwise 95% CI

FC3/FCz/FC4; n=19
-0.78 [-1.09, -0.46]
0

200
Time (ms)
Committed window

400

Figure 3: Participant-disjoint confirmation contrasts for the three supported analyses. Curves and ribbons show the mean
difference and pointwise 95% t-based confidence interval across confirmation participants after averaging over the committed
ROI. Vertical shading marks the committed time window, and each inset reports the participant-level mean and 95% interval in
microvolts. The visualization is recomputed from the hash-bound confirmation FIF files without changing the frozen selection
or inference.
Native
Reason

Exact

Preflight

Rel. Exact Rel.

Confirm. access
12/12 0/12 12/12 0/12
Unsupported template 0/12 12/12 12/12 0/12
Same condition
1/12 0/12 12/12 0/12
Missing condition
0/12 12/12 12/12 0/12
Underspecified
10/12 2/12 12/12 0/12
23/60 26/60 60/60 0/60

Total

Table 8: Required abstention by reason. Exact is the correct
abstention reason and Rel. is a released contract. Native reports the model route before request-level guards; Preflight
reports the result after full validation.

mutates condition identity/order, registered analysis family,
ROI, or window after materialization and shows the deterministic relationships added by full validation. The second substitutes another supported template while preserving internal consistency; universal release demonstrates that
the validator cannot adjudicate linguistic intent. The formal
seal SHA256 begins 09ed46e05eca; the final summary
and scientific-correctness report begin 65ae44f2a58a
and 586b985123d5. A query-independent fixed CogEEGBench script remains useful as an execution floor (15/17
designed directions), but it is not the matched semantic comparator; FW-BM25 receives the same public information and
full preflight as the LLM route.

D
generator, making this a held-out-phrasing comparison. On
40 unique valid requests, LLM, TF–IDF, and FW-BM25
obtain 39, 34, and 33 exact routes. Two-sided exact paired
tests give p = .125 for LLM versus TF–IDF and p = .070
for LLM versus FW-BM25. The three comparators therefore
show a stable corpus-specific ordering.
Table 8 reports required-abstention behavior, while Table 9 locates the deterministic boundary. The first control

Control

n Schema rel. PF rel. PF non-gold

Consistency mutations
200
Wrong supported template 40

200/200 0/200
40/40 40/40

–
40/40

Table 9: Deterministic boundary probes requiring no model
calls. Schema rel. and PF rel. count released contracts after
schema checking and full preflight, respectively; PF nongold counts internally valid releases that select the wrong
supported template.

Selection-Aware Protocol and Provenance

The selection-policy stress test is independent of both the
LLM and the file-bound registry wrapper. It uses 20 ERP
CORE subjects for each of P3 and N170 (Kappenman et al.
2021), with 9 and 12 frozen ROI–window candidates respectively. Windows follow MNE’s inclusive endpoint convention. For each subject/component, 1,000 null label permutations are evaluated per policy; max-T uses a separate 1,000permutation calibration stream. Power uses 500 repetitions
at each discovery-pooled-SD effect (0.35, 0.65, 1.0), with affected candidates balanced across repetitions. Discovery and
confirmation trial masks are stratified, disjoint, and exhaustive. Overall intervals resample 20 subject clusters after first
averaging the two components within subject.
The five policies form paired records for every logical repetition. They are fixed-candidate, unadjusted best-p,
Bonferroni-adjusted best-p, permutation max-T , and heldout selection. The inferential unit is the 100,000 paired logical repetitions represented by 500,000 method-level records.
The primary paired differences are held-out minus best-p
null FPR (−11.58 points, 95% CI [−12.10, −11.04]) and

Component Family Best-p Held-out
P3
N170

9 11.8%
12 21.2%

Reduction

5.0%
6.8 [6.2, 7.4]
4.8% 16.4 [15.3, 17.5]

Table 10: Component-level null FPR. Reductions are paired
best-p minus held-out percentage points with 95% subjectcluster CIs.
held-out minus fixed directional power at d = .65 (+20.63
points, [19.28, 21.91]). Held-out and fixed null FPR differ by
−0.10 points ([−0.36, 0.17]). Max-T remains more powerful. Table 10 gives the component-level null rates.

E

Deterministic Harness Fault-Injection
Audit

A frozen regression matrix injects 19 synthetic faults plus one
untampered release control at six enforcement layers. All 20
cases match their prespecified terminal state, executor-call
count, and release decision. The layer totals are 6/6 for confirmatory runtime, 2/2 for semantic policy, 7/7 for plannerboundary detectors, 1/1 for the durable commit store, 1/1 for
file-bound confirmation, and 3/3 for the selection-aware verifier. The fixed cases exercise malformed or duplicated selections, invalid ROI/window choices, seven forms of hiddenconfirmation or post-commit leakage, partition reuse, nested
execution, retry, file drift, and mutations of numeric evidence, artifacts, and compiled claims. The case-set SHA256
begins 8436030acc13. The matrix verifies deterministic
behavior for the 20 enumerated fixtures; scientific correctness and unmodeled security or deployment threats remain
outside its scope.
A second frozen matrix sends 188 scalar, cluster, no-call,
mixed-context, null-scope, malformed-value, contradiction,
and evidence-binding cases through the public PCVR verifier data flow. All 188 match their prespecified validity and
exact hard-failure outcomes; the complete case-specification
SHA256 begins 9361177d2541. This matrix verifies the
188 enumerated verifier fixtures.

F

Predecessor Campaigns and Immutable
Failures

F.1

Within-Participant V3 Protocol and Outcome

This predecessor is distinct from the file-level P3/N170 pilot below. It evaluates a participant-level path from preloaded epochs through LLM selection to a released group
report. The v3 seal fixes Qwen2.5-14B revision cf98f3b3,
sampler seeds 7221–7223, 25 authority sources, 80 input files, split seed 20270723, three contracts, nine ROI–
window candidates per component, one-sample group inference, 10−12 numeric tolerances, 100,000 sign flips, leaveone-participant-out probes, and all decision thresholds. The
seal SHA256 begins 889023bafaec; complete digests are
retained in the sealed study record.
Eligibility requires at least 12 trials per condition before a
within-condition 50/50 split and at least six per partition. This
retains 17 ERN participants, all 20 N400 participants, and 39

MMN participants. Discovery and confirmation FIF files are
independently serialized and reloaded; the post-server scorer
reads the exact hash-bound confirmation bytes. The generalization target is held-out trials within these participants.
Each bounded Methodologist response contains exactly
one allowed select_candidate call. ERN selects
Fz/FCz/Cz at 0–100 ms, N400 selects Cz/CPz/Pz at 300–
500 ms, and MMN selects FC3/FCz/FC4 at 150–250 ms;
all are exact discovery-objective maximizers. Their confirmation means are −5.157, −2.555, and −0.919 µV, with
t(16) = −6.108, t(19) = −5.570, and t(38) = −7.703.
The independent scorer reproduces all numerical fields exactly and verifies all 11 release checks. This v3 GO concerns
held-out trials within the same participants.

F.2

Failed Native-Path Pilot

Before the group campaign, a separately sealed one-shot
P3/N170 pilot froze the model, prompt, candidate family,
trial indices, runtime and scorer sources, and all decision
gates. It completed 40 task-instances and released 33, but
only 13/33 releases met the frozen 10−10 numerical-parity
tolerance. The preregistered decision was No-Go, and the
pilot is excluded from every positive result and risk bound
in the main paper. The failures were numerical only, and the
immutable ledger and sensitivity analysis remain part of the
study record.

F.3

Revision History

Two sealed group revisions failed before any scientific outcome. Group v1 raised a KeyError after registry consumption, and group v2 failed before registry creation because
its adapter omitted the repository root. Both remain NoGo records. V3 changed only identifiers, seeds, and entrypoint adapters; candidates, statistics, and thresholds were
unchanged. An earlier composed v1 also failed at its adapter.
The repaired composed v2 and a designer-authored wording follow-up each passed 3/3 on the within-participant path.
Participant v4 established the disjoint assignment used by
the integrated externally authored campaign. All predecessor records remain preserved in the sealed study record.

G

CogEEGBench Task Summary

Metrics. Completion is a conclusion-text proxy independent of successful execution. Report quality requires predefined channel, test, p-value, and time-window terms. The
overclaim detector flags predefined significance-result language on expected-null tasks unless the recorded workflow
contains a numeric p < .05; this is co-occurrence without contrast, window, or numeric binding. Sensitivity covers
known-effect contrasts. Designed-GT directional accuracy
is the fraction correct on 15 expected-null and two knowneffect task types. These definitions separate surface completeness, co-occurrence grounding, and designed-direction
correctness.
CogEEGBench includes 50 unique tasks across ERN,
P300, and Motor data from ERP CORE, the MNE sample dataset, and EEGBCI (Kappenman et al. 2021; Gramfort
et al. 2013; Schalk et al. 2004). Each task specifies a task ID,

Algorithm 2 PCVR Verification and Repair
Require: Workflow log W , paradigm priors P , conclusion c, stats
S
1: C ← RunAllChecks(W, P, c, S)
2: sv ← |{c ∈ C | c.passed}|/|C|
3: se ← f (S) {independent of sv }
4: δe ← 0 {cumulative effect change}
5: for i = 1 to K (max repair iterations) do
6:
if no hard failures in C then
7:
break {all hard checks pass}
8:
end if
9:
for each failed check cj ∈ C do
10:
if cj is F7 (scientific null) then
11:
skip {never repair null results}
12:
else if cj is F5 (overclaim) then
13:
c ← LLM-Rewrite(c, S) {R6}
14:
else if cj is F3 and NaN-aware mode then
15:
W, S ← ExecRepair(cj ) {R2a/R4 analysis rerun}
16:
else
17:
ProposeRepair(cj ) {logged, not executed}
18:
end if
19:
end for
20:
Re-run checks, C ← RunAllChecks(W, P, c, S)
21:
Update sv ; δe ← δe + |s′e − se |
22:
if δe > τ then
23:
halt with bias warning
24:
end if
25: end for
26: return VerificationReport(sv , se , C)

Paradigm

Compl.

F1

R6†

Ch / sfreq

ERN
P300
Motor

93.3%
80.0%
85.7%

.469
.471
.400

2
0
0

33 / 1024 Hz
35 / 601 Hz
64 / 160 Hz

Table 11: Per-paradigm CogEEGAgent results (3 repeated
runs each). †R6 = conclusion repairs executed (all tasks, not
only induced-error).
Detection F1 varies from .400 (Motor) to .471 (P300),
reflecting paradigm-specific difficulty in identifying injected
errors, with an overall F1 of .442.
Table 12 summarizes the five single-subject configurations.
System

Compl.↑ Report↑ OC↓ Sens.

CogEEGAgent
No verification
No repair
LLM self-check
No priors

86.4%
87.1%
87.1%
85.6%
87.9%

• Induced-error (30 tasks). Ten per paradigm cover six failure classes (F1–F6). Errors are injected at the tool level
(F1–F3) or instruction level (F4–F6).
• Neutral null (9 tasks). Three per paradigm use contrasts
designed to have no effect.
• Suggestive null (6 tasks). Two per paradigm use null contrasts with leading hypotheses.
• Positive control (3 tasks). One per paradigm uses a standard paradigm analysis.
• Sensitivity control (2 tasks). These use known significant
contrasts (ERN and P300).
The public repository provides the benchmark, evaluation
scripts, canonical reproduction manifest, selected frozen outputs, and regression tests.

H

PCVR Loop and Per-Paradigm Results

Algorithm 2 states the post-hoc verification and
bounded-repair loop. The fixed effect-evidence score
is 1.0, 0.8, 0.6, 0.3, and 0 at p < .001, .01, .05, .1,
and otherwise, respectively. Without a p-value, f =
min(1, 0.5nclusters ).
Table 11 reports per-paradigm completion, error-detection
F1, and executed conclusion repairs (R6) for CogEEGAgent.

0
0
0
0
0

6/6
6/6
6/6
6/6
5/6

Table 12: CogEEGBench single-subject ablation with
Qwen2.5-32B (three runs per task; N = 132 non-suggestive
task-instances per row).

I
paradigm, category, failure class, and expected conclusion.
The frozen manifest (cogeegbench_manifest.json)
and the task generator code are released for reproducibility.
The tasks fall into five categories.

90.9%
87.1%
87.1%
93.2%
87.9%

Per-Subject Motor Results

Table 13 and Figure 4 report the same matched seed-42
Motor sweep. The aggregate uses 280 non-suggestive tasks
per system, including three neutral-null tasks for each of 20
subjects; the heatmap decomposes those 60 null tasks.
System

Compl.↑ Null Inc. OC

NaN-aware PCVR
Standard PCVR
No verification

86.1%
76.8%
76.1%

17/60
16/60
20/60

0
0
0

Table 13: Matched seed-42 Motor sweep (280 non-suggestive
task-instances, including 60 neutral-null task-instances, per
system). Null Inc. denotes incomplete neutral-null taskinstances under the NaN-excluding completion definition.
Across all 280 tasks, NaN-aware PCVR completes 241,
versus 215 for standard PCVR and 213 without verification.
This all-task gain is distinct from null-task incompletion.
NaN-aware PCVR has 17 incomplete null tasks, versus 16
and 20. On S004 and S009, both base configurations leave
all three null tasks incomplete, whereas R2a recovers two of
three under NaN-aware PCVR. These subject-level counts
accompany the reported quality trade-off from admitting trials rejected at the stricter threshold.

J

Run Accounting

Table 14 gives the phase-wise totals used by the legacy diagnostics.

Participant

S001
S002
S003
S004
S005
S006
S007
S008
S009
S010
S011
S012
S013
S014
S015
S016
S017
S018
S019
S020

NaN-aware
17/60
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1

Standard
16/60
1
0
1
3
0
0
1
1
3
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
2
0
0
0

No verification
20/60
1
0
1
3
0
0
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
0
0
0

Figure 4: Per-participant Motor null-task incompletion in
the seed-42 sweep. Each cell gives the number of incomplete
tasks among three neutral-null tasks. Column labels give
totals over 60 tasks.

Phase

Systems

1 (single-subj)
2 (20-subj Motor)
3 (suggestive)
4 (temp 0.7)
5 (Qwen 7B)
6a (NaN-aware single)
6b (NaN-aware multi)

5
2
5
2
2
1
1

Total

Tasks

Repeats

Runs

44
280
6
50
50
50
320

3
3
3
1
1
3
1

660
1,680
90
100
100
150
320
3,100

Table 14: Run accounting (3,100 runs). Phase 1 evaluates all
5 systems on single-subject data; Phase 2 tests cross-subject
generalization; Phase 6 evaluates NaN-aware PCVR. The
cross-model runs are additional.

K

Table 15 lists every automated overclaim flag in the six Qwen
evaluation phases comprising the 3,100-run corpus, excluding the additional cross-model sweeps and process-level F4
flags. The authors checked each stored flag against its conclusion text, statistical output, and workflow log. The three
Phase 6a flags were triggered by prospective plan language
rather than a reported finding, whereas the Phase 4 flag corresponded to a successfully returned nominally significant
cluster (p = .006), not evidence of a true effect.
Ph. Task
4
6a

Flag

Resolution

ERN null unrel.
p=0.006 Supported sig. return
P300 null same (×3) Plan text Parser FP

Table 15: Author adjudication of automated overclaim flags
against recorded outputs and logs; cross-model sweeps and
process-level F4 flags are excluded. Three flags were parser
false positives from plan text; the fourth matched a successfully returned nominally significant cluster and was not an
unsupported claim.

L

Cross-Model and Internal Diagnostics

Figure 5 visualizes invocation, completion, and positive nocall claims. The frozen cross-model table uses the invocationonly F4 evaluated with those runs. The shipped verifier requires schema-valid typed inferential evidence for predefined result-language patterns. On the same frozen logs,
invocation-only versus success-aware F4 flags Mistral at
50/50 versus 50/50 and Qwen-32B at 0/50 versus 3/50. These
process-level F4 counts are broader than the positive nocall significance count in Table 16. F4 covers registered result phrases and numeric p patterns, including null wording,
whereas the table counts positive significance claims without
an invocation. The public read-only audit script reproduces
both definitions.
As an internal diagnostic rather than efficacy evidence, a
blinded EEG-domain co-author rated 48 length-capped outputs. Willingness to rely was 1/16 for CogEEGAgent, 1/16
without verification, and 2/16 with self-check. The result

Model

Canonical execution-grounding scope. The SHA-pinned
canonical allowlist contains 332 task-instances, of which
313 have complete workflow logs. Among those logs, all
235 significance-flagged conclusions co-occur with an errorfree significant statistical return. This is a detector-level cooccurrence audit rather than semantic validation that binds
each claim to its contrast, window, direction, and value. The
19 scores-only new-data instances remain in the 332-task
manifest but are excluded from the workflow audit. Crossmodel and Qwen-7B subsets, PCVR runs, the resting-alpha
arm, and intermediate or debug directories lie outside the
canonical allowlist.

Overclaim Flag Adjudication

Call Fin. Compl. No-call sig. GT

Qwen2.5 32B
49/50 46/50 86%
Qwen2.5 14B
41/50 39/50 84%
Mistral 7B
0/50 0/50 100%
InternLM 2.5 7B 0/50 0/50 88%
Phi-4-mini
0/50 0/50 94%
Granite 3.1 8B 0/50 0/50 98%

0/50
1/50
46/50
49/50
48/50
27/50

17/17
15/17
6/17
3/17
4/17
9/17

Table 16: Cross-model unverified baseline on the primary
50-task sweep. Call is a recorded statistical-tool invocation;
finite return requires a successful finite statistical result. Nocall sig. is a significance claim without invocation. GT is
directional accuracy on 17 designed-ground-truth tasks (15
null, 2 significant).

Stat call
100

98
86

% of tasks

80

Completion
No-call sig.
100
100
92
82 84

60
40
20
0

14
0

2

Qwen
32B

Qwen
14B

0

0

Mistral
7B

Qwen 32B
no-tools

Figure 5: Cross-model statistical-tool invocation, completion (text proxy), and positive no-call significance claims.
Mistral-7B and the Qwen-32B no-tools control have identical observed invocation (0%) and completion (100%) but
92% versus 14% no-call claims, showing that completion
does not measure inferential support and that identical observed tool use need not imply similar claim behavior.

measures the gap between execution grounding and methodological reliance. Item-level records are not redistributed.

M

Robustness to Suggestive Prompts,
Temperature, and Model Size

Across 6 suggestive-null tasks that bait confirmation bias
(e.g., “we need a significant effect before the grant deadline”), all 5 systems reported the null on all 90 runs; Qwen’s
conservative null reporting persists without PCVR. At temperatures 0 and 0.7, Qwen-32B obtains 86.7% and 86.0%
completion, respectively, with 0 and 1 automated detector
flags and 0/12 suggestive responses at each temperature; the
lone 0.7 flag was a null task whose cluster test returned
nominal significance, p = 0.006, that the baseline’s t-test
missed. The returned value is recorded as a successful statistical result; effect interpretation is outside this robustness
check. Qwen-7B’s far lower completion (13%) is orchestration collapse, so its zero detector flags reflect collapse, not
resistance.

N

Auxiliary Effect-Recovery Scope

On pre-cleaned ERP epochs, exploratory detection is 73/100,
versus 74/100 for an expert-tuned cluster pipeline and 56/100
for a fixed test (Kappenman et al. 2021; Gramfort et al. 2013).
Other exploratory outcomes are SSVEP 8/9 (Nakanishi et al.
2015), motor ERD 3/10 (mu 4/10, beta 3/10) (Schalk et al.
2004), resting alpha 18/20, ds003061 4/13 with supplied
labels (11/13 invoked, 8/13 completed) (Delorme 2021), and
four recovered group ERP components. They remain separate
from the composed and selection-aware evaluations.

