SOURCE: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE INDEX REPORT 2026

Award winners
Almost 14,000 young researchers applied for
a 2026 GRFP award, submitting a research plan
and personal statement that were reviewed
by an independent panel of researchers. Typically, only about one in every six applicants
receive one of the prestigious fellowships.
In addition to covering tuition fees, the
fellowships come with an annual stipend of
US$37,000 for three years. Since 1952, when
the GRFP began, it has supported more than
70,000 researchers, and at least 40 of those
have gone on to receive Nobel prizes.
After rumours swirled that the Trump
administration would request a massive cut
to the NSF’s approximately $9-billion budget
for the 2026 fiscal year, in April last year the
agency cut in half the approximately 2,000
GRFP awards usually handed out. Months later,
however, 500 awards were added — mostly
in areas in which the Trump administration
wants the United States to be a world leader,
including artificial intelligence and quantum
science — bringing the total to 1,500.
In February this year, NSF leaders announced
at a board meeting that they intended to
reshape the agency to fund more research on
quantum science and AI, something reflected
in the newly announced awards. Fifty-three
of the latest GRFP awards are categorized as
being for quantum science, a 39% increase
from the previous year, and 103 are listed
under AI or machine learning, a 17% increase.
Fields funded by the agency’s engineering
directorate saw the largest boost in GRFP awardees in 2026, from 406 (or 27% of the total)
last year to 914 (or 35% of the total) this year.
But there were gains in other fields too.
Research funded by the biological sciences

directorate rebounded, going from 214 awardees (or 14% of the total) last year to 486 (or
19% of the total) this year. Many researchers
had been particularly worried about the biological sciences, given the reorientation of
the NSF to focus on quantum and AI. With the
exception of 2025, biological sciences applicants have received between 21% and 27% of
the GRFP awards during the past decade.
After the awards were announced, many
of the recipients from the record-breaking
cohort took to the Internet to celebrate.

“Beyond grateful and still in disbelief,” posted
Lena Kemmelmeier, a psychology PhD student
at the University of California, San Diego, on
the social-media platform Bluesky. “Thank you
to my wonderful lab mates.”
Another student, posting anonymously on
the social-media platform Reddit, where many
GRFP hopefuls have commiserated, shared
their excitement: “im a first gen PhD student
and this is such a huge accomplishment for
me!! Im tearing up in the middle of writing this
and my hands are shaking!”

HUMAN SCIENTISTS BEAT
THE BEST AI AGENTS ON
COMPLEX TASKS
State-of-the-industry report finds that, despite
limitations, researchers have embraced AI systems.
By Nicola Jones

I

n an indication of how quickly scientists are
embracing artificial intelligence, the number of publications in the natural sciences
that mention AI grew almost 30-fold from
2010 to 2025, according to an influential
annual report.
The proportion of publications in any given
natural-sciences field that mention AI ranges
from 6% to 9% (see ‘AI paper boom’), according
to the Artificial Intelligence Index Report 2026,
released last week by the Stanford Institute for
Human-Centered AI at Stanford University in
California (see go.nature.com/4ctbkrg).
“Scientists have really embraced this AI era,”

AI PAPER BOOM

The number of natural-science publications —
papers, preprints and other material — that
mention artificial intelligence has increased sharply
over the past 15 years. The natural sciences are
comprised of physical, life and Earth sciences.
Natural sciences*
Life sciences

Physical sciences
Earth sciences

100
Number of publications
that mention AI (thousands)

also ‘returned without review’ (sent back to
applicants without a score), according to data
shared with Nature by Grant Witness, a watchdog project that tracks changes to research
funding. This sparked concerns that the type
of science that the NSF would fund had also
changed.
But some of these worries have been allayed
with the announcement of a record-breaking
number of GRFP awardees this year.
Brian Stone, who is standing in as NSF
director until a permanent one is confirmed,
said in a statement that the continuation of
the programme reflects the Trump administration’s “strong focus on building talent
and investing in individual researchers”. He
added: “I’m excited to see how these emerging
STEM [science, technology, engineering and
mathematics] leaders will shape the future.”
The agency did not respond to Nature’s
queries about changes to the programme or
applications returned without review. On its
website, the NSF states that “the number of
applications returned without review this year
has not changed substantially since last year”.

80
60
40
20
0
2010

2015

2020

2025

*Totals do not tally as some publications are included in more than one sub-field.

says computer scientist Yolanda Gil at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles,
who led this year’s index report.
Alongside the boom in AI-related science
publications, the report also lists a host of
newly released science foundation models —
AI models that are broadly trained to take on a
wide range of tasks, but also specially trained
on massive data sets from a specific domain
of science.
Many researchers have started to rely on AI
‘agents’ that autonomously carry out actions
including scientific workflows, but the report
is sceptical about the agents’ performance.
AI agents still struggle to perform multistep
workflows reliably, the report says, with the
best AI agents scoring roughly half as well as
human specialists with PhDs. “Agents are wonderful, but we are still far from a place where
we understand how to use them effectively,”
says Gil.

Growing numbers
The report says that in 2025, more than 80,000
papers, preprints and other types of publication in the natural sciences — which include
life, physical and Earth sciences — mentioned
AI, 26% more than in 2024. Physical sciences
had the most publications that mention AI,
with 33,000. The Earth sciences category had
the highest percentage, at 9%.
The boom in AI-related science papers
is “not surprising”, says computer scientist
Arvind Narayanan at Princeton University in
New Jersey. But it’s not clear, he says, whether
the rise of AI use is productive for science.
“Whether or not this explosive growth is meaningful is hotly debated,” Narayanan says. “My
Nature | Vol 652 | 23 April 2026 | 841

News in focus
view is that it is happening too fast, without
giving scientific norms time to adjust, and so
the quality of research has taken a nosedive.”
Gil says there isn’t much evidence yet that
AI is improving scientists’ productivity. “The
studies are limited,” she says. But, she adds,
scientists “can’t live without it. If you took AI
away from them, there would be a riot. So it
must be helping in some way.”

a lot of hype around agents, but they are
already extremely useful to researchers as
time-saving tools.”
The use of AI agents is part of a general
trend of scientists using AI tools not just for

data analysis but also for broader attempts at
hypothesis generation and discovery. That’s
exciting, but the index concludes that, for
now, “the list of experimentally confirmed AI
discoveries remains short”.

As uptake has grown, so has the number of AI
platforms available to researchers. The past
year has seen the emergence of many science
foundation models, including the first one for
astronomy: AION-1, which was trained on more
than 200 million celestial objects. This training helps it to classify galaxies and to estimate
their properties. “When I talked to scientists
in 2024 and said ‘There’s foundation models
for science’, scientists would not know what
that means. They didn’t know they existed. I
think we have seen that really advance very
quickly,” says Gil.
The performance of general-purpose foundation models, which include large language
models (LLMs) such as those used by chatbots,
on expert-level tests continued to improve rapidly in 2025, the index says. “I keep thinking:
next year it’s going to plateau. And it doesn’t,”
says Gil. But these leading AI models still make
basic mistakes, such as reading analog clocks
incorrectly 50% of the time.
On a positive note, models that generate videos “are beginning to learn how the physical
world actually works”, the index says. The AI
community has long hoped that models will
be able to learn the basic rules of physics, such
as how gravity affects a bouncing ball. In 2025,
Google DeepMind’s Veo 3 video model was
able to simulate phenomena such as buoyancy
without being trained to do so. But there’s a
long way to go, says Narayanan. “Despite some
minor successes,” he says, “the dream seems
pretty far away.”

Agentic abilities
Several benchmark tests emerged in 2025
to score the performance of AI agents on
science-relevant tasks. A test called PaperArena, for example, gives LLM-based agents
a research question and then evaluates their
ability to “formulate a reasoning plan, interact
with multiple papers and invoke appropriate
tools to produce a well-grounded answer”,
according to an unreviewed preprint describing that benchmark (D. Wang et al. Preprint at
arXiv https://doi.org/q3fw; 2025). On this test,
even the best LLM powering a skilled agent
achieved an accuracy of just 39%.
Narayanan has a more positive view of what
agents. In November, his own team showed
that agents can ace one benchmark test for
reproducing computational results in scientific papers, he says. “There is obviously
842 | Nature | Vol 652 | 23 April 2026

O. SCHWARTZ, M. SOURISSEAU, MC. PREVOST, INST. PASTEUR/SPL

Top models

Chikungunya particles (red) infecting a cell.

VIRUSES ALLEGEDLY
STOLEN FROM
HIGH‑SECURITY LAB
The samples have been recovered by Brazilian
police, but questions linger over motive.
By Mariana Lenharo

B

razil’s federal police arrested a
researcher late last month for allegedly taking samples of viruses from a
high-security biosafety laboratory at
a leading Brazilian university. Soledad
Palameta Miller, a virologist at the State University of Campinas (Unicamp), was released
on bail on 24 March and faces charges including theft.
Police have recovered the missing samples
— which included specimens of the viruses
chikungunya, dengue and Epstein–Barr,
according to the Brazilian news programme
Fantástico — from other locations on Unicamp’s campus. Brazil’s National Health Regulatory Agency (Anvisa) said this month that
it had evaluated the recovered samples and
that they did not pose a risk to people’s health.
But the news has caused a stir in the Brazilian virology community, whose members are

wondering how the lapse could have happened
at a lab designated biosafety-level-3 (BSL-3),
the second-highest security classification.
The community is “perplexed”, says Paulo
Sanches, a virologist at São Paulo State University in Araraquara, Brazil. “No sample can
be removed from a lab with this biosafety level
without authorization.” The news comes as
Brazil is building support for the construction of its first BSL-4 lab — the highest level of
biosafety facility — only a few kilometres from
Unicamp.
Miller did not respond to a request for comment from Nature. In a statement, Unicamp
said that it is cooperating fully with the police
and is conducting an internal investigation.

Police investigation
The samples were allegedly stolen from Unicamp’s Laboratory of Virology and Applied
Biotechnology. BSL-3 facilities are equipped
with air filters and containment systems to

