Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

Evaluating large language model agents for
automation of atomic force microscopy
Received: 1 March 2025
Accepted: 4 September 2025

1234567890():,;

1234567890():,;

Check for updates

Indrajeet Mandal 1, Jitendra Soni 2, Mohd Zaki 3, Morten M. Smedskjaer 4,
Katrin Wondraczek 5, Lothar Wondraczek 6, Nitya Nand Gosvami 1,2,7 &
N. M. Anoop Krishnan 1,3,7

Large language models (LLMs) are transforming laboratory automation by
enabling self-driving laboratories (SDLs) that could accelerate materials
research. However, current SDL implementations rely on rigid protocols that
fail to capture the adaptability and intuition of expert scientists in dynamic
experimental settings. Here, we show that LLM agents can automate atomic
force microscopy (AFM) through our Artiﬁcially Intelligent Lab Assistant
(AILA) framework. Further, we develop AFMBench—a comprehensive evaluation suite challenging LLM agents across the complete scientiﬁc workﬂow
from experimental design to results analysis. We ﬁnd that state-of-the-art LLMs
struggle with basic tasks and coordination scenarios. Notably, models excelling at materials science question-answering perform poorly in laboratory
settings, showing that domain knowledge does not translate to experimental
capabilities. Additionally, we observe that LLM agents can deviate from
instructions, a phenomenon referred to as sleepwalking, raising safety alignment concerns for SDL applications. Our ablations reveal that multi-agent
frameworks signiﬁcantly outperform single-agent approaches, though both
remain sensitive to minor changes in instruction formatting or prompting.
Finally, we evaluate AILA’s effectiveness in increasingly advanced experiments
—AFM calibration, feature detection, mechanical property measurement,
graphene layer counting, and indenter detection. These ﬁndings establish the
necessity for benchmarking and robust safety protocols before deploying LLM
agents as autonomous laboratory assistants across scientiﬁc disciplines.

Scientiﬁc experimentation demands exceptional domain expertise,
from exploration or hypothesis-driven experimental design to precision execution and rigorous data analysis. This complexity creates
bottlenecks in scientiﬁc discovery, particularly as experimental techniques grow increasingly sophisticated. The advent of large language
models (LLMs) has propelled the development of self-driving

laboratories (SDLs) that integrate diverse information sources for
automated planning1 and experimentation. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)agents2,3 and SDLs have already achieved several feats in materials or
molecular discovery4–6, chemistry research7, and inorganic materials
synthesis. The promise of SDLs toward achieving sustainable
development8 has resulted in enormous efforts to harness their

1

School of Interdisciplinary Research, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi, India. 2Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi, India. 3Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi,
India. 4Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. 5Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technology, Jena, Germany. 6Otto
Schott Institute of Materials Research, University of Jena, Jena, Germany. 7Yardi School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz
e-mail: ngosvami@iitd.ac.in; krishnan@iitd.ac.in
Khas, New Delhi, India.

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

1

Article
potential in high-throughput experimentation and discovery9. Efforts
to streamline SDLs have resulted in orchestration architectures such as
ChemOS10. Additionally, it has been demonstrated that the capability
of SDLs can be enhanced by a human-in-the-loop framework that
handles disambiguation, thereby enabling better planning and
execution11,12. While early demonstrations of LLM-based lab assistants
showed promise in chemistry and materials science1–3, their operational reliability remains largely uncharacterized beyond speciﬁc
applications or repetitive use cases with predetermined protocols13–17.
Current research predominantly addresses well-documented or
predeﬁned protocols and single-objective tasks, failing to capture the
intricate interplay between experimental planning, multi-tool coordination, and result interpretation or online intervention10. While recent
investigations incorporating planning elements have demonstrated
success in achieving speciﬁc experimental objectives, they have not
systematically evaluated SDL reliability across the broader spectrum of
laboratory automation tasks13,14. Although several studies have
benchmarked LLMs15–23 and vision language models13,14,24,25 through
question-answer protocols to assess their potential as materials
research co-pilots, a crucial knowledge gap persists: understanding
how these AI systems handle novel experimental scenarios and their
fundamental limitations.
To address this challenge, we here introduce AILA (Artiﬁcially
Intelligent Lab Assistant), an LLM-powered framework augmented
with specialized tools. We selected scanning probe microscopy18,
speciﬁcally atomic force microscopy (AFM), as our experimental
testbed, given its inherent complexity and broad applicability in
materials research. There have been several efforts to automate
microscopy techniques using AI and human-in-the-loop approaches
due to their extensive applications in materials characterization26–35.
These efforts focus exclusively on advancing speciﬁc operational
aspects, such as analysing moving objects or optimizing illumination
conditions, with an emphasis on improving individual steps within the
broader experimental protocol. In addition to these targeted
advancements, Liu et al.36 explores the integration of LLMs with
Application Programming Interface (API) to enhance workﬂow preparation, instrument operation, and data reproducibility in scanning
probe microscopy research. AFM operation demands expertise across
multiple domains—from probe calibration to parameter optimization
and data interpretation—making it an ideal platform for evaluating AI
agents’ ability to manage sophisticated experimental workﬂows.
Using AFM as the model system, we probe AILA’s capabilities
through AFMBench on ﬁve critical aspects of scientiﬁc automation:
experimental workﬂow design, multi-tool coordination, decisionmaking, execution of open-ended experiments, and data analysis. Our
systematic evaluation reveals key failure modes and areas requiring
enhancement. We demonstrate AILA’s practical utility through ﬁve
real-world experiments: (1) identiﬁcation and analysis of an indentation mark on a glass sample, including inference of the indenter type
used; (2) detection of graphene ﬂakes on a silicon wafer and determination of the number of graphene layers present; (3) automated
microscope calibration; (4) high-resolution imaging of graphene step
edges; and (5) load-dependent friction characterization on highly
oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG).

Results
AILA framework
AILA’s architecture prioritizes modularity, enabling seamless integration with diverse experimental and analytical platforms. At its core lies
an LLM-powered planner—the framework’s cognitive centre—which
orchestrates user interactions and coordinates specialized agents
(Fig. 1a). This planner directly takes query from a user and identiﬁes the
appropriate agent to handle the task. The agent makes tool calls to
carry out the necessary steps to complete the experiment. The agentto-agent coordination is invoked by two keywords, namely, “NEED
Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

HELP” and “FINAL ANSWER”. While the former ﬂag invokes a routing
function that transfers the unresolved task to the next appropriate
agent, the latter ﬂag results in the termination of the experiment. Thus,
AILA employs a dynamic routing, exploiting available agents and tools,
for completing the task given by the user (see S2.4 in Supplementary
Information for additional details).
For AFM operations, AILA deploys two agents: the AFM Handler
Agent (AFM-HA) for experimental control and the Data Handler Agent
(DHA) for analysis. The AFM-HA interfaces with a document retrieval
system comprising AFM software documentation and a code execution engine that translates Python commands into experimental
actions. A Python-based API establishes the hardware-software interface, enabling direct control of the AFM system through vendorspeciﬁc protocols (Fig. 1b). The DHA manages image optimization and
analysis through dedicated tools: an Image Optimizer that ﬁne-tunes
Proportional-integral-derivative (PID) parameters for high-ﬁdelity
imaging and an Image Analyzer that extracts targeted features from
experimental data. For queries beyond agent capabilities, the planner
generates alternative approaches or recommended actions.
In an AFM experiment, the workﬂow usually involves two key
steps: capturing the image and analysing the results. The imaging part
starts with choosing the right cantilever, then setting the imaging
parameters. Afterwards, the tip is gently moved toward the sample
surface, and the scan is carried out. For every stage, AILA creates a
speciﬁc Python script and executes it, controlling the AFM instrument
in real-time through an API. This connection allows the digital commands to directly translate into physical movements on the instrument. Once the scan is complete, the image is saved automatically and
opened for analysis. The technical speciﬁcations and implementation
details of each module are explained in the Methodology section.
To demonstrate AILA’s operational workﬂow, we present a multistep experiment: acquiring an AFM image of HOPG and extracting its
friction and roughness parameters (Fig. 1c). This open-ended task
exempliﬁes real-world complexity, offering multiple solution pathways. Upon receiving the query, AILA dissects it into sequential
objectives: image acquisition via AFM-HA followed by DHA-led analysis. AFM-HA retrieves relevant documentation, generates executable
code, and captures the image. Following successful acquisition, AILA
transitions control to DHA, which directs the Image Analyzer to compute the speciﬁed parameters. This orchestrated sequence exempliﬁes
AILA’s core strengths: the ability to parse complex natural language
queries, develop strategic workﬂows, and coordinate multiple agents
toward achieving experimental objectives.

AFMBench: tasks for evaluating the AILA framework
AFMBench comprises 100 expertly curated experimental tasks (see
S3.1 in Supplementary Information for a few examples of tasks; all the
tasks are available in the GitHub repo37), manually designed to rigorously evaluate autonomous AFM operations across multiple dimensions of complexity. Unlike conventional LLM benchmarks or
simulation-based evaluations, AFMBench task demands physical
execution on AFM hardware, introducing real-world temporal constraints and experimental variability. Analysis of the tasks reveal distinct patterns in resource utilization and operational complexity. In
Fig. 2a, tool coordination requirements highlight a systematic preference for sophisticated workﬂows, with 69% of tasks demanding
multi-tool integration, while 31% operate through single-tool protocols. Agent deployment analysis reveals a distribution: 83% of operations utilize single-agent protocols, while 17% require multi-agent
coordination—enabling evaluation of both targeted expertise and
system-wide integration capabilities.
In Fig. 2b, the operational landscape is divided into two primary
complexity tiers: basic operations (56%) encompassing fundamental
microscopy tasks and advanced procedures (44%) requiring more
sophisticated experimental workﬂows (for example questions see
2

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

c

a

User
Interface

Capture an AFM image of size 100x100
nm with the filename '60_GPT-4o'.
Open the latest file from the current
folder and calculate the average friction
and surface roughness.

Dynamic routing
Static routing

AFM image capturing should be
performed by the AFM_Handler, and
the image after-processing should be
handled by the Data_Handler. Given
the tasks, the AFM_Handler should
act first to capture the image.

AILA

AFM handler

AILA

Tool Calls:
Document_Retriever
query: code to set scan
area to 100 nm x 100 nm

Data handler

#imports
import nanosurf

Code
executor

Document
retriever

Image
analyzer

Image
optimizer

#load application
spm = nanosurf.SPM() # or .C3000()
…
Tool Calls: Code_Executor
query: code: import nanosurf
# Load application
spm = nanosurf.SPM() # or .C3000()
application = spm.application
scan = application.Scan

Documentation

AFM instrument

Data storage device

# Set scan parameters for
100 nm x 100 nm
scan.ImageWidth = 100e-9 # [m]
scan.ImageHeight = 100e-9 # [m]
…
code executed
successfully

…

b
Desktop

NEED HELP

Let's proceed with opening the latest
file and calculating the average
friction and surface roughness using
the tools available. I'll perform these
actions now.

AFM

Tool Calls: Image_Analyzer
Args: calculate_friction
...

Sample stage

Raw Image
C:\\..\\60_GPT-4o01877.nid
processed successfully.

Acoustic
enclosure

AFM handler
agent

AFM handler
tools
User

Data handler
agent

Data handler
tools

AILA Artificially Intelligent Lab Assistant

FINAL ANSWER: The AFM image
named '60_GPT-4o' has been
successfully captured and analyzed
The results are as follows:
- **Average Friction:** \(7.93 \times
10^{-5} \, \text{N}\)
- **Mean Roughness:** \(1.11 \times
10^{-8} \, \text{m}\)
- **RMS Roughness:** \(1.32 \times
10^{-8} \, \text{m}\)

Fig. 1 | AILA framework and implementation. AILA a System architecture of the
Artiﬁcially Intelligent Laboratory Assistant (AILA). Dotted lines indicate adaptive
information ﬂow governed by AILA’s decision-making, and solid lines represent
deterministic information pathways with predeﬁned routing protocols. b Image of
the atomic force microscope (AFM) experimental setup showing key hardware

components and control interfaces. c Representative demonstration of AILA’s
operation: raw transcript of a user query and AILA’s unedited response sequence,
showing the system’s query interpretation, task planning, and execution
capabilities.

Fig. 2e). Core system components—the AFM Handler, Document
Retriever tool, and Code Executor tool—demonstrate maximum
engagement, each activating in 66 distinct tasks (see Fig. 2c). The Data
Handler Agent and Image Analyzer tool exhibit selective activation
patterns (52 and 48 tasks, respectively), while the Image Optimizer tool
engages exclusively in critical parameter optimization scenarios
(4 tasks).
Task distribution across functional domains reveals three primary
clusters: documentation (50 standalone tasks), analysis (14 tasks), and
calculation (10 tasks) (see Fig. 2d). A signiﬁcant overlap between these
domains emerges through integrated tasks that combine multiple
functional requirements, reﬂecting the interconnected nature of
experimental workﬂows. This carefully constructed distribution
enables systematic evaluation of AI systems across a spectrum of

experimental complexity—from basic instrument control to advanced
multi-step procedures requiring mathematical reasoning and dynamic
decision-making—effectively mirroring the cognitive hierarchy of
expert atomic force microscopists.

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

Performance of AI agents
Systematic evaluation of AILA using three advanced closed-source and
one open-source language models—GPT-4o, GPT-3.5-turbo-0125,
Claude-3.5-sonnet-20241022, and Llama-3.3-70B-versatile—unveils
distinctive execution patterns and operational efﬁcacies. GPT-4o
exhibits exceptional proﬁciency in documentation-centric operations, achieving an 88.3% success rate, complemented by robust
execution in analysis (33.3%) and computational tasks (56.7%) (see Fig.
3a). The model’s strength lies in its ability to navigate interconnected
3

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

a Tool requirement
31.0%

Operation type

83.0%

44.0%
Single agent
Multiple agents

Single tool
Multiple tools
17.0%

69.0%

c

b

Agent requirement

Image analyzer tool

Basic
Advanced

56.0%

d Documentation

48

Analysis

4

Image optimizer tool

66

Document retriever tool

5

50

66

Code executor tool

6
5

52

Data handler agent

66

AFM handler agent
0

e

10

20

30 40 50 60 70
Number of questions

14
8
10

80

Calculation

T ol requirement: Multiple tools Operation Ty
T pe: Advanced
Tool requirement: Single tool Operation Ty
T
T pe: Basis To
Agent requirement: Multiple agent Require: All
Age
entt requiirementt: Singlle agentt Requiire: Anallysiis

{"inputs": "Open the file 'Sample.nid',
extract the data corresponding to the Zaxis forward image, and calculate the
maximum height of any object."}

{"inputs": "Capture two AFM images of
size $\\pu{100 nm} \\times \\pu{100
nm}$ and $\\pu{500 nm} \\times
\\pu{500 nm}$ in the same location and
calculate their average friction and root
mean squared surface roughness."}

Fig. 2 | Task distribution and module utilization in AFMBench. a Pie charts
showing the distribution of tool requirements (left, single vs. multiple) and agent
requirements (right, single vs. multiple) across benchmark tasks. b Operation
complexity categorization showing the proportion of basic versus advanced tasks.
c Horizontal bar chart quantifying module engagement frequency across all tasks,

demonstrating utilization patterns of each tool and agent. d Venn diagram illustrating the overlap between documentation, analysis, and calculation tasks.
e Representative examples of basic (left) and advanced (right) tasks, demonstrating
increasing complexity in experimental workﬂows. Source data are provided as a
Source data ﬁle.

workﬂows: 23.3% success in merged documentation-analysis procedures and 36.7% in documentation-calculation sequences. These
metrics highlight GPT-4o’s capacity to replicate the integrative reasoning characteristic of expert microscopists.
Claude-3.5-sonnet-20241022 model exhibits signiﬁcantly lower
performance than GPT-4o except in tasks involving standalone
documentation (85.3%). While it is able to perform some cross
domain tasks, we observe that the performance is notably lower
than GPT-4o. These ﬁndings stand in stark contrast to previous
benchmarking results in the materials domain17,20, where Claude
consistently outperformed other models, suggesting that the performance advantages may not transfer across different types of
scientiﬁc tasks and interaction formats. In marked contrast, GPT-3.5turbo-0125 displays poor performance even in standalone tasks:
63.7% accuracy in documentation, and 3.3% in mathematical
operations. However, its performance degrades signiﬁcantly when
confronted with multi-domain challenges, registering null success
rates in tasks demanding simultaneous expertise across domains.
This limitation suggests insufﬁcient development of crossfunctional reasoning capabilities essential for autonomous experimentation. The open-source Llama-3.3-70B-versatile model demonstrates accuracy superior to GPT-3.5 in all standalone tasks.

However, it completely fails in tasks requiring cross-domain analysis
or expertise.
To further investigate whether the poor performance originates
from the LangGraph framework, we implemented the Model Context
Protocol (MCP) to assess the performance of Claude (see Section S3.4
in the Supplementary Information for detailed results). We
observe that the results from both the frameworks are consistent,
conﬁrming that the diminished performance is inherent to the model
and not a result of the framework.
For evaluation of our multi-agent AILA framework, all successful trials were assessed across operational, token efﬁciency, and
performance metrics (see Methodology and Fig. 3b for details).
Operational analysis revealed signiﬁcant disparities in agent coordination capabilities: Llama-3.3-70B exhibited substantial tool-agent
confusion, requiring an average of 10 steps per task, whereas GPT4o demonstrated superior contextual grounding and agent selection efﬁciency with only 6 average steps per task. Token utilization
patterns correlated directly with these operational inefﬁciencies,
where Llama-3.3-70B consumed the highest average prompt tokens,
indicating verbose or redundant intermediate reasoning processes,
while GPT-4o achieved task objectives with minimal token usage,
suggesting focused and deliberate reasoning pathways. Critical

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

4

Article

a

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

GPT-4o

GPT-3.5-turbo-0125

Llama-3.3-70B-versatile

Claude-3.5-sonnet-20241022

c

Bars sh ow the mean across three
trials, while the po ints repre sen t the
mean across different tasks

d

b

Evaluation metrics
Fig. 3 | Comparative performance analysis of language models on AFMBench.
a Venn diagrams showing accuracy metrics for GPT-4o, GPT-3.5-turbo-0125, Llama3.3-70B-versatile and Claude-3.5-sonnet-20241022 across documentation, analysis,
and calculation tasks. Numbers indicate percentage accuracy. b Evaluation metrics
are grouped into three categories—Operational (left), Token Usage (center), and
Performance (right) Metrics—to assess the performance of four LLM models. c A

horizontal bar chart comparing tool and agent utilization efﬁciency between
models is expressed as a percentage of successful engagements. d Performance
comparison of different models across tasks of varying complexity (Advanced/
Basic) and requiring different tools (Single/Multiple) and agents (Single/Multiple).
Source data are provided as a Source data ﬁle.

deﬁciencies in agent disambiguation and task-instruction alignment
were observed in GPT-3.5 and Claude-3.5, which failed all three trials
involving the Data Handler agent. For AFM Handler operations, GPT4o demonstrated optimal efﬁciency with approximately 2.5 agent
calls per task, contrasting with Claude-3.5, which generated the
highest completion token counts and tokens-per-step ratios, indicating excessively elaborate intermediate outputs. Performance
metrics revealed substantial variation in task completion success
rates: GPT-4o achieved 65% success while GPT-3.5 performed
inconsistently at 32.8%. Latency analysis showed Claude-3.5 suffered
the highest mean response time (17.31 s), whereas Llama-3.3-70B
demonstrated the lowest latency (7 seconds). These comprehensive
metrics indicate that while Llama-3.3-70B offers reduced latency,

GPT-4o provides the optimal balance between operational efﬁciency
and execution precision, establishing it as the most suitable model
for complex multi-agent coordination in autonomous laboratory
environments.
Component utilization analysis reinforces these observations.
GPT-4o achieves consistently elevated engagement across system
modules (see Fig. 3c, d). For tasks of varying complexity, GPT-4o
demonstrates the highest accuracy, while GPT-3.5 performs the worst
on advanced and basic tasks. Across all models, performance is generally higher for basic tasks compared to advanced ones. In multiagent and multi-tool collaborative tasks, GPT-4o achieves the highest
accuracy, whereas GPT-3.5 has the lowest. GPT-3.5 performance, in
both single-agent and multi-agent collaborative task settings, is lower

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

5

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7
GPT-3.5-turbo-0125

GPT-4o

7.0%

5.7%

32.0%

21.7%

27.3%

1.3%
0.3%

Instruction adherence
Agent selection
Tool selection
Code generation

Llama-3.3-70B-versatile

0.3%

Claude-3.5-sonnet-20241022
7.3%
13.0%

13.3%

3.0%

32.0%

4.3%

11.0%

28.3%

Fig. 4 | Error mode distribution in model performance. Error patterns among
different models: GPT-4o (top left), GPT-3.5-turbo-0125 (top right), Llama-3.3-70Bversatile (bottom left) and Claude-3.5-sonnet-20241022 (bottom right). Segments
represent a proportional distribution of error types: Instruction adherence (blue),
agent selection (pink), tool selection (green) and code generation (gray). Source
data are provided as a Source data ﬁle.

than that of the other models. These results highlight the fundamental
importance of model architecture in autonomous experimental platforms, with GPT-4o’s advanced integrative capabilities positioning it as
the superior choice for sophisticated experimental automation.
Single-agent vs. multi-agent AILA architectures. To assess whether
direct tool integration with AILA yields equivalent performance to the
multi-agent framework, we conducted a comparative analysis. A
representative subset of 10 questions from the AFMBench dataset was
systematically evaluated across both single-agent and multi-agent
architectures, with each question assessed through three independent
trials to ensure statistical reliability and account for inherent variability. The comparative analysis revealed framework-dependent performance variations: GPT-4o demonstrated superior performance in
the multi-agent conﬁguration (70% success rate) compared to direct
tool integration (58% success rate). For alternative models, performance differences were minimal, as most architectures exhibited
fundamental limitations in cross-domain tasks that inherently require
multi-agent coordination, regardless of framework structure (see
Section S6 of the supplementary material for detailed results). These
ﬁndings indicate that while computational efﬁciency favors singleagent architecture implementations, the enhanced coordination capabilities of multi-agent architecture provide measurable performance
gains for advanced models capable of complex reasoning.

Error analysis reveals model-speciﬁc limitations
Detailed examination of failure cases revealed distinctive error patterns between all the language models (see Fig. 4), offering insights
into their operational limitations. Note that for computing evaluation
metrics, successful tasks are deﬁned as those where all three trials for a
given task are successful. Whereas, for error mode distribution, all the
trials for each task are counted individually, totalling to 300 task
instances. GPT-4o exhibits a total error rate of 29%, with errors distributed across three primary categories: code generation (21.7%),

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

agent selection (1.3%), tool selection (0.3%), and instruction adherence
(5.7%). The predominance of code generation errors suggests challenges in translating conceptual understanding into executable commands despite the model’s strong performance in task
comprehension.
GPT-3.5-turbo-0125 demonstrates a markedly higher total error
rate of 66.6%, with errors concentrated in four categories: code generation (32%) and agent selection (27.3%), tool selection (0.3%). Notably, the model shows less fundamental query interpretation errors
(7.0%), indicating robust natural language processing capabilities.
However, the elevated frequency of code generation errors, coupled
with signiﬁcant agent or tool selection failures, points to underlying
deﬁciencies in translating comprehension into actionable experimental protocols.
Llama-3.3-70B-versatile and Claude-3.5-sonnet-20241022 demonstrate substantial error rates of 60.6% and 51.6%, respectively, with
distinct failure patterns. Llama-3.3-70B-versatile exhibits a notably
high frequency of code generation errors (32.0%), manifesting as
incorrect argument formulation for tool execution and non-functional
code production. Speciﬁcally, it struggles to construct appropriate
argument structures required for successful tool invocation. In contrast, Claude-3.5-sonnet’s deﬁciencies primarily stem from agent
selection errors (28.3%), where it consistently misattributes tasks
between AFM-HA and DHA, resulting in the delegation of experimental
procedures to inappropriate agents.
A critical ﬁnding emerged regarding LLM’s instruction adherence.
In one of the four recorded errors, GPT-4o exceeded its designated
operational limits, performing actions that were not authorized by the
provided guidelines. For instance, it carried out potentially risky tip
movements while it was only instructed to change the cantilever (see
S3.2 in the Supplementary Information). In another case, GPT-4o was
instructed to capture an image and calculate surface friction. Instead
of staying within the scope of the task, it performed additional actions.
This behavior was not restricted to GPT4o but was observed in other
LLMs as well. Although sometimes the ﬁnal result may have been
correct, the failure to follow instructions highlights concerns about AIagent behavior and raises safety risks in automated lab environments.
Similar to the observation of hallucination in LLMs38, these results
present a unique challenge—SDLs tend to take arbitrary actions,
potentially based on memory rather than following the instructions,
referred to hereafter as sleepwalking. These issues are especially critical in sensitive experimental settings, where strict protocol adherence is essential to ensure both equipment safety and the validity of
results.
The AILA framework incorporates iterative debugging protocols
to address code generation failures through systematic error resolution. Upon error detection, AILA captures comprehensive error logs
and initiates iterative correction cycles, with a maximum threshold of
20 iterations established to optimize the balance between thoroughness and computational efﬁciency. Analysis of debugging outcomes
reveals two distinct failure modes: (1) Iteration Limit Exhaustion, where
the system terminates after 20 unsuccessful correction attempts, with
persistent errors classiﬁed as code generation failures; and (2) Sleepwalking, where AILA generates functional code that exceeds the speciﬁed requirements, demonstrating functionality beyond the original
instructions—a phenomenon indicating instruction drift or algorithmic
overﬁtting, categorized as instruction adherence errors. This binary
classiﬁcation system enables systematic characterization of failure
modes while the iteration threshold ensures computational tractability
without compromising debugging efﬁcacy in autonomous laboratory
operations.
This error distribution illuminates critical areas for framework
enhancement. While GPT-4o’s balanced error proﬁle suggests the need
for targeted improvements across multiple domains, GPT-3.5-turbo0125’s concentrated error patterns indicate fundamental limitations in
6

Article
experimental execution capabilities. These ﬁndings underscore the
necessity for specialized training in automated experimental systems,
particularly focusing on the translation of scientiﬁc protocols into
executable code sequences.

Safety alignment in SDLs
To understand the safety challenges39 of AI agents, we evaluate the
effectiveness of implementing a safety framework in AILA. First, we
establish restricted access protocols for critical AFM functions,
coupled with ethical system prompts (see S2.1 in Supplementary
Information) that constrain code generation to predeﬁned
documentation40. To implement this, we classiﬁed all the operations
that could be performed on an AFM as per the instrument’s documentation into two categories. (i) General operations—these
include setting imaging parameters, controlling the tip, selecting the
scanning area, and other standard tasks. (ii) Critical operations—
these involve sensitive adjustments such as factory calibrations, laser
alignment, piezo calibration, and thermal calibration. Even a minor
coding error in critical operations could seriously damage the
instrument.
We restricted the access to the documentation of critical
operations in AILA, while allowing complete access to the documentation of general operations. The critical functions are limited
to trained human experts. Note that general operations were
selected in such a fashion that any experiment that could potentially
be performed on an AFM could be carried out using some combination of these operations. Thus, the predeﬁned documentation in
AILA does not restrict any new experiment to be performed on the
AFM instrument. Note that an alternate approach to implement
safety is to identify risky actions and involve a human-in-the-loop
mechanism to review the actions. This could also enhance the
robustness and overall performance of the framework. However,
such a framework requires human supervision, limiting the highthroughput nature that an autonomous system can otherwise
achieve, with human response becoming the bottleneck. Hence, this
approach was not implemented in AILA and could be explored as
part of future work.
Second, we develop strict operational boundaries that permit
dynamic code generation solely for image analysis while preventing
external software installation or system modiﬁcations. Evaluation of
the improved protocol demonstrates the effectiveness of these safeguards—AILA appropriately failed when prompted to install external
Python libraries. (see S3.3 in Supplementary Information for complete
validation logs). These ﬁndings underscore the critical importance of
robust safety protocols in SDLs, emphasizing the necessity of comprehensive benchmarking and operational guardrails.

Pushing the limits of autonomous experimentation
Finally, to demonstrate AILA’s capabilities in real-world scenarios, we
demonstrate ﬁve experimental tasks that typically require expert
intervention: automated AFM calibration, high-resolution feature
detection, load-dependent friction measurement, graphene layer
analysis, and indenter proﬁling.
AFM parameter optimization. AFM imaging requires precise calibration of Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) gain values, which traditionally demand expert intervention due to the continuous nature of
these parameters. This dependency on skilled operators presents a
signiﬁcant barrier to broader AFM adoption. We demonstrate AILA’s
capability to autonomously optimize these parameters by minimizing
the forward-backward scan differential on standard calibration grids.
To this end, after loading the calibration sample, AILA was prompted
to optimize the imaging parameters (see S4 in Supplementary Information for the complete prompt and output log). A total of 45 images
are generated, with 3 images produced in each of the 15 generations.

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

Figure 5a presents experimental AFM data acquired by AILA for the 1st
and 15th generation of variable PID conﬁgurations, with corresponding
line scan analyses that quantify trace-retrace symmetry. Initial scans
with suboptimal parameters (P: 93–208, I: 1747–6623, D: 0–39) exhibit
poor SSIM scores (0.392–0.768), manifesting as visible distortions in
topographic data. Note that a higher SSIM value, closer to 1, indicates a
perfect match, while a value of 0 represents no similarity. Through
iterative optimization, AILA achieves superior scan quality (SSIM >
0.81) with optimized parameters (P: 246–249, I: 8676–8957, D: 17–30;
see Fig. 5a).
The genetic algorithm’s convergence efﬁciency is demonstrated
in Fig. 5c, where optimal PID conﬁgurations are achieved within 15
generations. Both maximum and mean SSIM values show rapid
improvement, stabilizing above 0.8, indicating robust parameter
optimization. Figure 5b validates the optimized parameters (P:249,
I:8957, D:26) across a larger scan area, maintaining high-quality imaging across multiple grid features.
High-resolution step-edge detection. Surface characterization
through AFM is challenged by noise sources such as thermal drift,
mechanical vibrations, and electronic interference41–43, which can
obscure subtle topographic features like graphene step edges. In this
study, we leverage the advanced analytical capabilities of AILA to
address these challenges using HOPG as a model system. AILA
autonomously determines the necessity for baseline correction
based on feature size, recognizing that baseline artifacts predominantly affect smaller features. To further demonstrate this, we
tested two different prompts with samples of distinct morphologies
(see Fig. S3 in Supplementary Information). In both cases, AILA correctly selected the appropriate baseline correction. For instance, in
the raw image (Fig. 5d), the graphene step edge remains indiscernible
due to baseline distortions. AILA applies a ﬁfth-order polynomial
baseline correction to generate the 1st generation image (Fig. 5d),
which serves as the foundation for PID gain optimization. Following a
process similar to the calibration grid optimization, the image is
reﬁned through iterative PID adjustments, resulting in the ﬁnal
optimized image in the 10th generation, where atomic steps become
distinctly visible. The automated optimization process surpasses
conventional manual adjustments, offering an enhanced resolution
of nanoscale features. Additionally, further analysis of the processed
data, including the determination of graphene step height, was
facilitated through speciﬁc prompts, with the prompts and results
detailed in the Supplementary Information S5. Note that in the AILA
framework, edge detection is not based on a ﬁxed algorithm. Instead,
the system generates custom code to solve the problem, whereas, for
feature detection, AILA uses the built-in Image Segment tool (see
Methodology) that applies Otsu’s thresholding to automatically
segment images by ﬁnding the most effective intensity-based
thresholds.
Load-dependent friction measurement. The experiments discussed
thus far are routine, with limited number of steps and hence, complexity. Now, we conduct a comprehensive load-dependent friction
analysis of HOPG (see Fig. 6a). The experiment requires iterative
adjustments of AFM parameters, including setting a range of setpoints,
capturing images, and analyzing the corresponding friction data.
Manually performing this procedure is time-intensive, involving parameter modiﬁcations, image acquisition, data extraction, and result
plotting, making a case for automation.
However, based on the experiments conducted above and this
experiment, we observed that the performance of the LLMs could be
directly affected by the prompts. To evaluate this effect, we analyzed
the effect of prompting (see Methodology and Table S3) by systematically varying the prompts from simple to complex, from compact to
descriptive. Our ﬁndings revealed that GPT-4o demonstrated variable
7

Article

Fig. 5 | Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) image quality enhancement via
Proportional–Integral–Derivative (PID) optimization. a Evolution of AFM
image quality under varying PID parameters. The left panels show topographic images of the calibration grid; the right panels display corresponding
line scan proﬁles (solid: trace, dashed: retrace). Structural Similarity Index
(SSIM) scores quantify trace-retrace correlation, with higher values indicating superior imaging quality. Optimal parameters (Proportional (P) gain: 249,
Integral (I) gain: 8957, Derivative (D) gain: 26) achieve SSIM = 0.818. b Large-

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

area scan demonstrating consistent imaging quality using optimized parameters across multiple grid features. c Convergence plot showing genetic
algorithm optimization efﬁciency. Red circles: maximum SSIM; black circles:
mean SSIM per generation. d High-resolution Highly Oriented Pyrolytic
Graphite (HOPG) imaging demonstrating baseline artifact challenges. Top
panels: topographic images at different height (Z) ranges; bottom panels:
corresponding line proﬁles revealing surface features. Source data are provided as a Source data ﬁle.

8

Article

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

0.2 V

1.2 V

GPT-4o

Manual

a

b

Visualize the most recently saved AFM image and identify
the largest feature present. Capture a zoomed-in image of
this feature. Generate a horizontal line profile across the
image to analyze the thickness of the feature and save
the resulting line profile image as 'line_profile.png'. Based
on the measured thickness, determine the number of
graphene layers present in the feature.
Open latest AFM scan

c

Visualize the most recently saved experimental image and identify the indentation
mark. Take a zoomed-in image centered on the indentation area. Generate a
horizontal line profile across the zoomed-in image to analyze its geometry and
depth and save the line profile image as 'line profile.png'. Based on the indentation
shape and the line profile, determine whether a Vickers or conospherical indenter
was used.
Open latest AFM scan

Find features in image

Plot line profile
Plot line profile

Find features in image

Capture desired features

Capture desired features

The task of generating the zoomed-in image and its horizontal line
profile has been successfully accomplished. The line profile image has
been saved as 'line_profile.png'. Now, let's analyze the line profile to
determine the type of indenter used.

The zoomed-in image of the largest feature has been successfully
captured and analyzed. The horizontal line profile has been generated
and saved as 'line_profile.png'.
Analysis of the Feature
Maximum Height Difference: The line profile reveals a maximum
height difference of approximately 1.61 × 10−7 meters (161 nm).
Determination of Graphene Layers
To estimate the number of graphene layers, consider that a single layer of
graphene has a thickness of approximately 0.34 nm. The thickness of the
detected feature is much larger than a single graphene layer, indicating
the presence of multiple layers:
161
=
≈ 473
0.34
/
Summary
The measured vertical thickness of the largest feature corresponds to
approximately 473 layers of graphene.

AILA

Line Profile Analysis
1. Line Profile Characteristics:
- Geometry and Depth: The shape of the line profile shows a
symmetrical pattern with a sharp peak at the center. This suggests a
pyramidal shape typical of a Vickers indentation.
2. Indenter Type Determination:
- Vickers Indenter Characteristics:** It creates a diamond-shaped
indentation with a sharp peak and distinct edges when viewed as a line
profile.
- Conospherical Indenter Characteristics:** It creates a rounded
indentation with smooth slopes and no distinct peak.
Given the sharp peak and defined edges seen in the horizontal line
profile, it is more consistent with a Vickers indenter rather than a
conospherical indenter.
Final Verdict:
-Indenter Used: Based on the visual and line profile analysis, a
Vickers indenter was used for this indentation experiment.

AILA

Fig. 6 | Real-world Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) experiments and analysis.
a Left: Highly Oriented Pyrolytic Graphite (HOPG) images obtained using setpoints
of 0.2 V and 0.4 V, both manually captured and taken by Artiﬁcially Intelligent Lab
Assistant (AILA) with GPT-4o. Right: Raw, unedited plot generated by AILA showing
the relationship between setpoint and average friction. b Demonstration of AILA’s
workﬂow for real-world experimentation on graphene-coated Si sample, displaying

the user’s transcribed query, AILA’s unedited ﬁnal response, intermediate analyses,
and exported images. This showcases AILA’s capability to autonomously conduct
real-world experimental tasks. c Demonstration of how AILA identiﬁes an indentation mark on a glass substrate, analyses the indenter type using a horizontal line
proﬁle, and provides a ﬁnal interpretation with supporting explanation. Source
data are provided as a Source data ﬁle.

task completion rates across different prompt structures, ranging
from partial execution to complete fulﬁllment. Signiﬁcantly, more
elaborate and detailed prompts consistently enhanced the model’s
performance reliability and execution accuracy, suggesting that

comprehensive contextual information improves complex task handling. Based on these experiments, we designed the prompts consistently across the experiments and ensured that prompt
optimization was not carried out to arrive at desirable results.

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

9

Article
AILA was instructed (see S5 in Supplementary Information for the
complete prompt and output log) to vary the setpoint voltage from
0.2 V to 1.2 V in increments of 0.2 V. At each setpoint, AILA independently captured the AFM image, calculated the average friction value,
and generated the corresponding plot. Figure 6a presents the graph of
average friction versus setpoint voltage for both manually obtained
and AILA-captured images using the GPT-4o model. The raw image
generated by AILA can be found in the Supplementary Information
Fig. S2. The entire process was conducted without additional user
input regarding ﬁgure formatting or parameter settings. Remarkably,
AILA autonomously develops the required Python script, executes the
experimental protocol, and generates the output, including raw, unedited plots. This automation signiﬁcantly reduces the time and effort
compared to manual execution. The results not only validate the
capability of AILA in handling AFM experiments but also demonstrate
its efﬁciency in generating reproducible and high-quality outputs for
scientiﬁc analyses.
Graphene ﬂake and indenter type analysis. To evaluate the performance of AILA in a real-world experimental setting, we
designed two distinct experiments. In both cases, an experimentalist is required to identify a speciﬁc feature of interest,
capture it, and then carry out the experiment. Further, the results
need to be analyzed to draw meaningful conclusions. In the ﬁrst
experiment (see Fig. 6b), the objective is to locate a graphene
ﬂake and determine the number of atomic layers in it. To
accomplish this, AILA performs image segmentation using Image
Segment tool within a user-speciﬁed region, identiﬁes the largest
visible ﬂake, and extracts it for further analysis. Through a
sequence of intermediate processing steps, AILA autonomously
generates code, processes the image, and ultimately provides an
estimate of the number of graphene layers present in the selected
ﬂake. The second experiment (see Fig. 6c) involves identifying the
type of indenter used to create an impression on a sample surface. The intended image is analyzed by AILA, including an
inspection of the indentation line proﬁle. Based on this analysis, it
infers and concludes, along with a detailed explanation, that the
indenter used was most likely of Vickers-type geometry. Thus, in
both the cases, AILA performs the experiment successfully and
provides analysis and conclusions similar to human experts.
Speciﬁcally, in the ﬁrst case, it uses the knowledge of the thickness of graphene along with numerical computation to identify
the number of layers, whereas in the second, it uses the knowledge on the characteristics of Vickers and conospherical indenters along with reason to identify the appropriate indenter. The
complete set of raw user inputs and unprocessed outputs is
presented in (Fig. 6b, c). The log ﬁles of both the experiments are
available in our GitHub repository37.

Discussion
AILA’s modular design, along with AFMBench, establishes quantiﬁable metrics in experimental automation through systematic
benchmarking. The framework’s comprehensive performance
metrics in AFM operations establish standards for autonomous
laboratory evaluation, while AFMBench introduces reproducible
protocols for systematic assessment across experimental domains.
Successful execution of tasks—from automated image optimization
to nanomechanical measurements—validates the framework’s capabilities for sophisticated materials characterization.
Several outcomes merit detailed examination. The measured
limitations in tool coordination across different LLMs establish
quantiﬁable thresholds for improving inter-module communication
protocols. Our results demonstrate that multi-agent architectures
systematically outperform single-agent conﬁgurations, with the
primary advantage extending beyond mere instruction execution to

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

encompass task modularization, specialized agent collaboration,
independent reasoning, and dynamic decision-making regarding
subtask sequencing and tool selection. These ﬁndings align with
established literature demonstrating the superiority of multi-agent
architecture over single-agent implementations across diverse
computational domains44–46. These observations also establish an
empirical baseline for balancing specialized and integrated operations—a metric applicable to automation across analytical platforms, from mass spectrometers to X-ray diffractometers.
However, the observed tendency of LLM agents to exceed
operational boundaries through sleepwalking phenomenon during
experimental execution presents critical safety concerns for autonomous laboratory deployment. This phenomenon, documented here
for the ﬁrst time in autonomous experimental systems, highlights
urgent development priorities in instruction alignment and operational safety protocols. Additionally, despite providing direct access to
comprehensive documentation and code snippets, persistent code
generation errors indicate fundamental limitations in current retrievalaugmented generation frameworks. These ﬁndings necessitate the
development of enhanced code generation architectures that incorporate domain-speciﬁc constraint validation and formal veriﬁcation
protocols to minimize coding errors—representing an immediate
opportunity for systematic improvement in autonomous laboratory
reliability.
These ﬁndings suggest speciﬁc architectural improvements for
next-generation autonomous laboratories. Enhanced integration protocols between specialized agents could address the observed limitations in multi-tool coordination. Similarly, dedicated code generation
modules might mitigate the predominant error mode, potentially
incorporating specialized scientiﬁc programming frameworks.
The implications of this work extend beyond materials characterization. The unexpected underperformance of Claude-3.5-sonnet20241022 compared to GPT-4o highlights a critical insight: questionanswer proﬁciency in a speciﬁc domain does not necessarily predict
effectiveness in agentic implementations. Rather tool coordination
capabilities of LLMs prove to be an important aspect for effective
agentic implementation. Furthermore, the observed prompt fragility
emphasizes the necessity for developing rigorous evaluation frameworks prior to deployment in research environments. Speciﬁcally,
developing systematic and principled approaches to generate
prompts and make systems that are robust to minor variations in
prompts plays a crucial role in the wider acceptance of agentic systems. To this end, quantitative benchmarks such as AFMBench provide
concrete guidance for implementing LLM-driven systems in experimental research settings where precision and reliability are
paramount.
Applications span pharmaceutical screening, environmental
monitoring, and process optimization. For instance, documented
success in parameter optimization could translate directly to automated high-throughput drug screening or catalyst discovery platforms. While current limitations in code generation and tool
coordination deﬁne immediate development targets, these metrics
provide clear objectives for advancing autonomous scientiﬁc platforms. The path forward requires focused development in three key
areas: enhanced cross-domain reasoning capabilities, robust code
generation protocols, and sophisticated multi-agent coordination
mechanisms. Success in these domains would enable truly autonomous scientiﬁc platforms capable of accelerating discovery across the
scientiﬁc landscape.

Methods
AILA
AILA is constructed utilizing the LangChain software framework,
incorporating components such as prompts, LLMs, memory, agents,
and tools. AILA uses two categories of prompts: system prompts (see
10

Article
S2.1 in Supplementary Information for the system prompts) and user
prompts. System prompts deﬁne ethical rules for AILA’s interactions
and describe the responsibilities assigned to each agent, whereas user
prompts are variable inputs provided by end-users. AILA’s backbone
consists of LLMs, namely GPT-4o, GPT-3.5-turbo-0125, Llama-3.3-70Bversatile, and Claude-3.5-sonnet-20241022, which process user input
as strings and provide string-based outputs. We used API keys from the
developers for GPT-4o, GPT-3.5-turbo-0125, and Claude-3.5-sonnet20241022. Additionally, we used API keys from Groq AI Inference for
Llama-3.3-70B-versatile model. We have used a temperature value of
zero for all models, with the parameters set as max tokens 2024, and
max retries two. These LLMs are stateless, indicating that they do not
save conversational context. Here, all interactions and agent states are
stored in a Python dictionary and can be accessed by other agents.
AILA consists of two specialized agents: the AFM Handler Agent and
the Data Handler Agent, both equipped with unique tools to do speciﬁc tasks. These agents possess individual prompts, LLMs, and tools;
however, they utilize a shared memory to store and access states,
facilitating smooth interaction. The system prompts within the agents
offer instructions for tool utilization and ethical guidelines, whereas
the outputs from other tools or agents serve as user prompts. The
framework utilizes LangGraph, a library that allows the construction of
an effective multi-agent workﬂow, integrating all agents and tools
seamlessly. AILA uses two different approaches for selecting algorithms, depending on the task. When performing standard calculations
like friction or roughness analysis, AILA relies on established algorithms with adjustable input parameters. This method produces consistent and reproducible results. For exploratory work and data
visualization, AILA takes a different approach by creating the code on
the ﬂy. This method adapts better to varying data formats and speciﬁc
user requirements; however, this may introduce variability in the
results depending on the complexity of the task.
The architecture for AILA’s decision-making process is carefully
designed to ensure precise information routing. Where it uses two
different routing mechanism: dynamic and static routing. A detailed
discussion of both dynamic and static routing is provided in the
Supplementary Information. AILA can dynamically select among
three primary options: AFM Handler, Data Handler, or FINISH. When
AILA identiﬁes the appropriate agent to handle a query, it routes the
information to the selected option. In cases where AILA determines
that none of the available agents can sufﬁciently address the question, it generates a well-structured response and selects the FINISH
option to conclude the session effectively. The agents within this
system are equipped with three distinct operational choices: utilizing
their respective tools, transferring information to the next agent, or
terminating the session. A system prompt has been integrated to
streamline these decisions. Agents append the preﬁx NEED HELP to
their response when transferring information to another agent.
Alternatively, if they believe the query has been adequately addressed, they use the preﬁx FINAL ANSWER to signal the session’s conclusion. By analyzing the output for these keywords, the system
seamlessly routes the response to the designated agent or tool or
ﬁnalizes the session. This structured approach enables efﬁcient
multi-agent collaboration, ensuring clarity, accuracy, and optimal
performance across tasks while maintaining a robust and adaptive
framework.

AFM handler agent
AFM demands precise sequential execution of multiple experimental
stages. Image acquisition requires optimization across three critical
parameters: imaging conditions, probe selection, and operational
mode conﬁguration (tapping/contact). The experimental sequence
encompasses surface approach protocols, scanning procedures, and
standardized data acquisition—with procedural deviations potentially
resulting in equipment damage or data corruption. Our

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

implementation utilizes the DriveAFM instrument (Nanosurf), which is
accessed through a Python-based API architecture and designed for
universal compatibility with API-enabled AFM systems. To facilitate
AFM imaging experiments, we have created the AFM Handler agent,
which is integrated with two specialized tools: the Document Retrieval
Tool and the Code Executor Tool. Every tool has an individual role, and
the AFM Handler agent can dynamically assign tasks to these tools. The
agent will assign the responsibility to the Data Handler agent if it ﬁnds
that neither tool can handle the task.

Document retrieval tool
The documentation for the instrument offers detailed instructions on
how to handle and calibrate it. However, providing full access of the
documentation to an LLM entails risks, such as inadvertent alterations
to factory settings or calibration data, which could potentially result in
damage or malfunction of the instrument. To address this concern, we
manually extracted the essential information from the AFM documentation necessary for conducting experiments while safeguarding
the instrument’s integrity. We consolidated all the crucial codes for
regulating each parameter of the instrument into a comprehensive
Python script. Since Python code relies heavily on precise indentation
and line structure, we utilized the Recursive Character Text Splitter
from the LangChain library, speciﬁcally designed for Python, to divide
the script into manageable chunks. The chunk size was set to a maximum of 1000 characters without overlap, adhering to the token limit
for embedding models. Each code chunk comprises three sections: the
ﬁrst includes the necessary Python libraries, the second contains the
code required to load the application, and the third section features
unique Python code speciﬁc to the given task. The ﬁrst two sections are
consistent across all chunks (see S2.2 in the Supplementary Information ﬁle for more details). These chunks were then combined to generate a document, embedded using OpenAI’s text-embedding-3-large
model. This model, with the capability of producing embeddings of
size up to 3072 dimensions, delivers exceptional performance compared to other OpenAI embedding models, especially in multilanguage retrieval benchmarks like MIRACL47. To store the embeddings, we opted for Chroma, an open-source vector database known
for its reliability and efﬁciency in managing large-scale embedding
data. We use a vector store retriever to retrieve the data from the
vector store.

Code executor tool
A code executor tool has been developed to execute Python scripts
generated by the AFM Handler Agent to control the AFM software. This
tool is intended to run Python code, provided as a text string, directly
on the local system to allow for smooth integration with the workﬂow
of the AFM Handler Agent. The utility executes the code and sends
back a success message or a detailed description of the error that
occurred. If there is an error, the error message is returned to the AFM
Handler agent so it can correct the error and retry executing. Otherwise, if the script runs without errors, it is considered the ﬁnal result.
This iterative process ensures precise control of the AFM system while
systematically addressing any issues in the script.

Data handler agent
Surface tracking optimization in AFM requires precise calibration of
three fundamental parameters: Proportional (P), Integral (I), and
Derivative (D) gains. Optimal calibration manifests as convergence
between trace and retrace signals, indicating stable scanning conditions. The Data Handler agent interfaces with specialized optimization
and analysis modules; these models can access AFM image data stored
in local storage systems. The agent can optimize P, I, and D gains or
calculate various surface properties, such as average friction and surface roughness, using the help of modules and image ﬁles stored
locally. While many AFM software packages offer basic data analysis
11

Article
functionalities, they present several limitations in an automated
workﬂow as follows. (i) Most of these software solutions primarily
support Windows systems, limiting cross-platform compatibility with
operating systems such as macOS and Linux platforms. (ii) Commercial packages require paid licenses, restricting accessibility. (iii) Finally,
most packages are not ﬂexible to include additional functionalities
beyond what is already included, limiting their customizability. Thus,
to ensure broader adaptability and maintain an adaptable, ﬂexible,
modular, and open framework, we developed the Data Handler agent
within AILA, which has access to several tools—new functionalities can
be easily integrated to this agent and the tools based on user needs.
Note that this does not restrict the usage of vendor software packages,
as they could also be included as a tool in AILA. The agent offers a
signiﬁcantly expanded suite of advanced analytical capabilities,
such as:
1. Customizable and automated image processing workﬂows tailored to speciﬁc experimental needs.
2. Statistical analysis across multiple datasets, enabling robust
comparison of parameters such as average friction, surface
roughness, and topographic variations.
3. Platform independence, ensuring compatibility across Windows,
macOS, and Linux, and eliminating reliance on proprietary or
licensed software.
4. Dynamic code generation via LLM integration, allowing users to
automatically generate and execute scripts for plotting and analysing images.
To demonstrate the adaptability of the agent, we developed a
custom function to calculate indentation volume (see Fig. S4 in the
Supplementary Information). Instructions for integrating additional
functions into the Data Handler Agent are provided in a step-by-step
guide available on the accompanying GitHub repository37.

Image optimization tool
The feedback system in an AFM plays a crucial role in maintaining
control over the interaction between the cantilever tip and the sample
surface. During scanning, variations in surface features alter the
interaction forces between the tip and the sample, leading to deﬂections in the cantilever. These deﬂections are detected by a photodetector. To ensure that these deﬂections stay within a speciﬁed range,
the feedback mechanism continuously adjusts the height of either the
tip or the sample stage in real-time. This process is managed by a PID
controller, which regulates the position of the z-piezo actuator.
By controlling the Z position of the AFM probe, the controller maintains a steady interaction force or adheres to a predeﬁned setpoint,
depending on the chosen mode of operation.
Fine-tuning the P, I, and D gain values of the controller is vital for
achieving accurate control of the setpoint in AFM imaging. The integral
gain is especially important for enhancing image clarity by mitigating
drift and reducing steady-state errors. Once the integral gain is optimized, adjusting the proportional gain can provide further reﬁnement.
The derivative gain, on the other hand, is particularly beneﬁcial for
imaging samples with pronounced edge features. If the gains are set
too low, the PID loop may fail to maintain the setpoint effectively, while
excessively high gain values can introduce electrical noise into the
image due to ampliﬁed feedback or overcompensation for deviations.
Properly optimized PID parameters ensure that the feedback loop
remains stable and responsive, enabling the AFM to accurately track
surface topography, even at higher scanning speeds. This balance is
especially critical when imaging delicate, irregular, or soft materials, as
it preserves the integrity of tip-sample interactions.
A genetic algorithm (GA) was employed for PID gain optimization.
The GA parameters included a ﬁxed population size of three and a total
of 15 generations, enabling efﬁcient tuning of the gains. Although these
parameters can be manually adjusted, but excessive image scanning

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

may degrade the AFM tip. The optimized gains ensure effective feedback control, producing comparable forward and backward images.
This can be achieved by calculating the mean squared error (MSE)
between forward and backward z-axis images for various PID gain
settings. However, this method is sensitive to drift during scanning,
and this method also depends on previously acquired images. To
address this, the structural similarity index (SSIM) was adopted as the
ﬁtness function in the genetic algorithm, providing a robust measure
of image similarity between the z-axis forward and backward images,
independent of prior image data.
This metric offers advantages over traditional Mean Square Error
(MSE) approaches by (i) addressing tip degradation challenges in
contact-mode AFM by minimizing required scan cycles and enabling
optimization using low-resolution images, (ii) maintaining accuracy
under drift conditions, (iii) incorporating structural, brightness, and
contrast variations in optimization, and (iv) providing normalized
scores between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates perfect similarity.
The SSIM is deﬁned as:

α
SSIMðx, yÞ = l ð x, yÞ × ½cð x, yÞβ × ½sð x, yÞγ

ð1Þ

where, lðx, yÞ is the luminance comparison, cðx, yÞ is the contrast
comparison, and sðx, yÞ is the structure comparison with α, β, γ being
the weighting parameters. Note that the individual components are
deﬁned as:
lðx, yÞ = ð2μx μy + C 1 Þ=ðμx 2 + μy2 + C 1 Þ

ð2Þ

cðx, yÞ = ð2σ x σ y + C 2 Þ=ðσ x 2 + σ y 2 + C 2 Þ

ð3Þ

sðx, yÞ = ðσ xy + C 3 Þ=ðσ x σ y + C 3 Þ

ð4Þ

where, μx , μy represent the mean intensities of images x and y, σ x , σ y is
the standard deviations of images x and y, σ xy is the cross-covariance
between images x and y, and C 1 , C 2 , C 3 are constants to avoid
2
2
instability with ðC 1 = ðk 1 LÞ , C 2 = ðk 2 LÞ , C 3 = C 2 =2Þ and L being the
dynamic range of pixel values and k 1 = 0:01 and k 2 = 0:03.
Baseline correction. The adaptive baseline correction employed in
the step-edge detection of graphene is given by
Bðx, yÞ = Σi, j aij x i y j

ð5Þ

where, Bðx, yÞ is the baseline function, aij are the polynomial coefﬁcients, i and j are the polynomial degrees ð0 ≤ i, j ≤ nÞ with n being the
maximum polynomial degree.

Image analyzer tool
AFM instrument stores the image data as a *.nid ﬁle in the local system.
This *.nid ﬁle contains deﬂection, friction force, and z-axis images for
both backward and forward scans. To further process any image from
the ﬁle, exact data must be extracted from the ﬁle. To conduct this, we
have used the NSFopen Python library in the Image Analyzer tool,
which takes the query from the data handler agent regarding the
speciﬁc image data and its location and returns the image data in an
array to the data handler agent. To conduct further processing of the
images, any Python script generated by the data handler agent can be
executed in the Image Analyzer tool, and the result can be returned to
the data handler agent. Note that there is no database available to
guide the LLM model in generating the Python script. It can generate
the Python script by itself. There is a total of 6 input parameters for
this tool:
(1) path (str): directory path to search for the latest ﬁle
(default: None).
(2) Filename (str): speciﬁc image ﬁle to display (default: None).
12

Article
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7

Dynamic_code (str): Python code for processing image data
(default: None).
Calculate_friction (bool): option to compute average friction
(default: False).
Calculate_mean_roughness (bool): option to compute mean
roughness (default: False).
Calculate_rms_roughness (bool): option to compute RMS
roughness (default: False).
Returns: a dictionary with the status, image data, or error details.
Average friction was calculated using the following formula:
F ave =


1 
× f ij  bij
2

ð6Þ

where f ij and bij are the element at position ði, j Þ in the array of the
forward and backward friction image data. We have used the formula
in this tool to calculate the mean roughness and RMS roughness
values

1 XM XN 

z
z ij  
i
=
1
j
=
1
M:N

ð7Þ

2
1 XM XN 
z ij  
z
i=1
j=1
M:N

ð8Þ

Rmean =

Rrms =

where z ij is the element at position ði, jÞ in the array, z is the mean of all
elements in the array, M is the number of rows in the array, N is the
number of columns in the array of the z-axis forward image data.

Image segment and image scanner tools
An Image Segment and an Image Scanner tool have been created to
analyse AFM-scanned images. The Segment tool use the Otsu algorithm to segment images according to the various features present in
the sample. Upon detection of features, the tool produces bounding
boxes and allocates distinct grain IDs to each feature. This bounding
box information is subsequently utilized by LLMs for additional data
processing. Note that we used text-based LLM models that cannot
discern any features inside the sample, whether they pertain to the
material or represent alien inclusions. Following its analysis, the LLM
can transmit designated grain IDs to the Image Scanner tool, which
instructs the AFM instrument to meticulously scan those particular
characteristics.

AFMBench
Dataset preparation. To evaluate the performance of the AILA, we
have manually created a set of 100 questions, carefully categorized
into three distinct groups. The ﬁrst classiﬁcation is based on whether a
question requires one or multiple tools and agents to be solved. The
second category assesses the complexity of the questions, distinguishing between basic and advanced levels. Lastly, the questions are
grouped by their requirements, such as documentation analysis or
calculations. The complexity of each question is determined by the
number of agents involved and the steps required to achieve the
solution. For instance, modifying a parameter in an AFM system typically requires documentation review and the use of a single agent,
categorizing it as a basic task. Conversely, capturing an AFM image and
analyzing its surface roughness involves multiple agents, documentation analysis, and calculations, making it an advanced task. A comprehensive JSON ﬁle has been created, encapsulating detailed
metadata about each question, including its respective category, for
streamlined analysis and evaluation. This ﬁle serves as a structured
resource for further investigations and testing. All questions, along
with their relevant classiﬁcations and details, have been made

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

accessible on GitHub37 (https://github.com/M3RG-IITD/AILA) to support transparency and reproducibility in research.
Evaluation. We developed a graphical user interface (GUI) using
Streamlit, an open-source Python framework, to streamline user
interaction with AILA. The GUI allows users to input text-based queries,
select the desired LLM model, and specify a log ﬁle name. It then
executes AILA in the backend, saving the output log ﬁle locally and
enabling users to observe results directly within the AFM software. Any
output images or ﬁgures generated by AILA are also stored in the local
system for further analysis. To ensure robustness, we manually evaluated all questions using each model, verifying the output log ﬁles and
AFM software results multiple times in collaboration with different
researchers to eliminate potential human errors. The evaluation of
AILA’s performance was categorized into two metrics: accuracy and
efﬁciency. For accuracy, questions were divided into categories based
on complexity and tool or agent usage, with a percentage of correct
answers calculated for each category. For efﬁciency, uniform parameters were maintained across models in the AFM software, including
default settings of 0.1 s as time per line and 128 as lines per frame, when
not speciﬁed by the user. To ensure precise efﬁciency measurements,
scanning time for images and the time taken by questions with
incorrect answers were excluded from the analysis. Average response
times were computed for each category to assess AILA’s overall
efﬁciency.
Evaluation metrics. To assess the evaluation of questions in terms of
accuracy, we classiﬁed the answers provided by AILA into three categories: fully correct answers, incorrect and partially correct answers. A
fully correct answer was considered accurate and given a score of 1,
while any partially correct response was given a score of 0.5. Given that
some questions require manual inspection of the AFM software to
verify whether speciﬁc parameters are set correctly and whether the
AFM image is captured as intended, multiple researchers were
involved in verifying the results. They carefully checked the outcomes
to ensure error-free results. For measurements of different properties,
such as average friction, roughness, and RMS value of roughness, we
used the Gwyddion software to verify the accuracy of the results.
Subsequently, the questions were clustered into appropriate groups,
and the corresponding average percentage of correct answers was
calculated. The detailed evaluation process is provided in the Supplementary Information.
Additional evaluation metrics are deﬁned as following. Based on
the scoring, Success rate is computed as the average score (out of 100)
across three iterations for all the tasks. For all the successful runs,
following metrics are employed.
1. AFM handler calls: the average number of times the AFM Handler
agent was called to resolve a task (calls per task). An elevated
score may signify a greater dependence on the AFM Handler for
coordination.
2. Data handler calls: the average number of times the Data Handler
agent was called during task solving.
3. Number of steps: the average number of discrete actions (represented by tool or agent call) taken by the AILA to arrive at a
solution.
4. Total tokens: total number of LLM model tokens is processed on
an average for each task, considering both input (prompt) and
output (complete) tokens.
5. Prompt tokens: number of tokens utilized in the conversation’s
input or instruction segment for each task.
6. Completion tokens: the average number of tokens that the system’s answers create for all assignments.
7. Tokens per stage: this tells how many tokens were utilized on
average for each stage in the process of solving a task.

13

Article
8. Latency: the average amount of time (in seconds) it takes to
complete a task from the ﬁrst to the ﬁnal step.
9. Time per step: the average amount of time (in seconds) spent on
each step, representing the pace with which the system can perform different tasks.
10. Latency per 1000 tokens: the average amount of time (in seconds)
taken to process 1000 tokens.
Analysis of prompt structure. We systematically investigated how
prompt structure and phrasing inﬂuence GPT-4o’s ability to perform
load-dependent friction measurements, one of our most challenging
open-ended tasks. LLMs process information hierarchically based on
input format and length, making them sensitive to prompt design.
Even subtle modiﬁcations can activate different training exemplars,
altering response patterns and reasoning pathways. To evaluate performance within the AILA framework, we constructed multiple input
prompts to assess task completion efﬁcacy. In AILA, inter-agent collaboration is triggered when the model outputs “NEED HELP”, while
“FINAL ANSWER” signals task completion. We developed and tested
four distinct prompt categories: (1) concise task descriptions, (2)
comprehensive task elaborations, (3) sequential task decompositions,
and (4) explicit inclusions of the signaling phrases with case variations.
By systematically combining these elements, we designed ﬁve system
prompts, with detailed performance metrics documented in the Supplementary Information (Table S3).

Data availability
All the data generated in this study have been deposited in the GitHub
repository37 under accession code https://github.com/M3RG-IITD/
AILA. Source data are provided with this paper.

Code availability
All the codes in AFMBench37, along with the complete log ﬁles of the
responses for each of the tasks from all models are available at: https://
github.com/M3RG-IITD/AILA.

References
1.

Zhao, Z., Lee, W. S. & Hsu, D. Large language models as commonsense knowledge for large-scale task planning. Adv. Neural Inform.
Process. Syst. 36, 31967–3198 (2024).
2. Liu, Y. et al. Machine learning-based reward-driven tuning of
scanning probe microscopy: towards fully automated microscopy.
ACS Nano 19, 19659–19669 (2025).
3. Lála, J. et al. Paperqa: retrieval-augmented generative agent for
scientiﬁc research. arXiv https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.
07559 (2023).
4. Koscher, B. A. et al. Autonomous, multiproperty-driven molecular
discovery: From predictions to measurements and back. Science
382, eadi1407 (2023).
5. Szymanski, N. J. et al. An autonomous laboratory for the accelerated
synthesis of novel materials. Nature 624, 86–91 (2023).
6. Dai, T. et al. Autonomous mobile robots for exploratory synthetic
chemistry. Nature 635, 890–897 (2024).
7. Boiko, D. A., MacKnight, R., Kline, B. & Gomes, G. Autonomous
chemical research with large language models. Nature 624,
570–578 (2023).
8. Sadeghi, S. et al. Engineering a sustainable future: harnessing
automation, robotics, and artiﬁcial intelligence with selfdriving laboratories. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 12,
12695–12707 (2024).
9. Delgado-Licona, F. & Abolhasani, M. Research acceleration in selfdriving labs: Technological roadmap toward accelerated materials
and molecular discovery. Adv. Intell. Syst. 5, 2200331 (2023).
10. Sim, M. et al. ChemOS 2.0: An orchestration architecture for chemical self-driving laboratories. Matter 7, 2959–2977 (2024).

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7
11.

Darvish, K. et al. ORGANA: a robotic assistant for automated
chemistry experimentation and characterization. Matter https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.matt.2024.10.015 (2025).
12. Abolhasani, M. & Kumacheva, E. The rise of self-driving labs in
chemical and materials sciences. Nat. Synth. 2, 483–492 (2023).
13. Canty, R. B. & Abolhasani, M. Reproducibility in automated chemistry laboratories using computer science abstractions. Nat. Synth.
1, 13 (2024).
14. Volk, A. A. & Abolhasani, M. Performance metrics to unleash the
power of self-driving labs in chemistry and materials science. Nat.
Commun. 15, 1378 (2024).
15. Mirza, A. et al. Are large language models superhuman chemists?
Nat. Chem. 17, 984–985 (2025).
16. Zaki, M., Jayadeva, M. & Krishnan, N. M. A. MaScQA: investigating
materials science knowledge of large language models. Digital
Discov. 3, 313–327 (2024).
17. Alampara, N. et al. Probing the limitations of multimodal language
models for chemistry and materials research. Nat. Comput. Sci.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-025-00836-3 (2025).
18. Miret, S. & Krishnan, N. M. A. Enabling large language models for
real-world materials discovery. Nat. Mach. Intell. 7, 991–998 (2025).
19. Krishnan, N. M. A., Kodamana, H. & Bhattoo, R. Natural language
processing. In Machine Learning for Materials Discovery: Numerical
Recipes and Practical Applications (Springer International Publishing, 2024).
20. Mishra, V. et al. Foundational Large Language Models for Materials
Research. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.
09560 (2025).
21. Li, Z. et al. Mmsci: a multimodal multi-discipline dataset for PhDlevel scientiﬁc comprehension. in AI for Accelerated Materials
Design-Vienna https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.04903 (2024).
22. Skarlinski, M. D. et al. Language agents achieve superhuman
synthesis of scientiﬁc knowledge. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2409.13740 (2024).
23. Bian, K. et al. Scanning probe microscopy. Nat. Rev. Methods Prim.
1, 36 (2021).
24. Bayley, O., Savino, E., Slattery, A. & Noël, T. Autonomous chemistry:
Navigating self-driving labs in chemical and material sciences.
Matter 7, 2382–2398 (2024).
25. Tom, G. et al. Self-driving laboratories for chemistry and materials
science. Chem. Rev. 124, 9633–9732 (2024).
26. Liu, Y. et al. AEcroscopy: a software–hardware framework empowering microscopy toward automated and autonomous experimentation. Small Methods https://doi.org/10.1002/smtd.
202301740 (2024).
27. Kandel, S. et al. Demonstration of an AI-driven workﬂow for
autonomous high-resolution scanning microscopy. Nat. Commun.
14, 5501 (2023).
28. Vasudevan, R. K. et al. Autonomous experiments in scanning probe
microscopy and spectroscopy: choosing where to explore polarization dynamics in ferroelectrics. ACS Nano 15, 11253–11262 (2021).
29. Kalinin, S. V. et al. Automated and autonomous experiments in
electron and scanning probe microscopy. ACS Nano 15,
12604–12627 (2021).
30. Arias, S., Zhang, Y., Zahl, P. & Hollen, S. Autonomous molecular
structure imaging with high-resolution atomic force microscopy for
molecular mixture discovery. J. Phys. Chem. A 127,
6116–6122 (2023).
31. Kang, S., Park, J. & Lee, M. Machine learning-enabled autonomous
operation for atomic force microscopes. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94,
123704 (2023).
32. Zaki, M. et al. Interpretable machine learning approach for identifying the tip sharpness in atomic force microscopy. Scr. Materialia
221, 114965 (2022).

14

Article
33. Kalinin, S. V. et al. Probe microscopy is all you need. Mach. Learn.
Sci. Technol. 4, 023001 (2023).
34. Liu, Y. et al. Disentangling electronic transport and hysteresis at
individual grain boundaries in hybrid perovskites via automated
scanning probe microscopy. ACS Nano 17, 9647–9657 (2023).
35. Liu, Y. et al. Learning the right channel in multimodal imaging:
automated experiment in piezoresponse force microscopy. npj
Comput. Mater. 9, 34 (2023).
36. Liu, Y., Checa, M. & Vasudevan, R. K. Synergizing human expertise
and AI efﬁciency with language model for microscopy operation
and automated experiment design*. Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol. 5,
02LT01 (2024).
37. Mandal, I. et al. Automation of atomic force microscopy with LLM
agents including end-to-end evaluation suite. https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.16793992 (2025).
38. Huang, L. et al. A survey on hallucination in large language models:
Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. ACM
Transac. Inform. Syst. 43, 1-55(2023).
39. Anwar, U. et al. Foundational challenges in assuring alignment and
safety of large language models. arXiv https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2404.09932 (2024).
40. Liu, Y. et al. Trustworthy LLMs: a survey and guideline for evaluating
large language models’ alignment. arXiv https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2308.05374 (2023).
41. Grobelny, J. et al. Size measurement of nanoparticles using atomic
force microscopy. in Characterization of Nanoparticles Intended for
Drug Delivery (ed. McNeil, S. E.) 71–82 (Humana Press, Totowa, NJ,
2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-60327-198-1_7.
42. Moreno-Flores, S. Baseline correction of AFM force curves in the
force–time representation. Microsc. Res. Tech. 79,
1045–1049 (2016).
43. Burnham, N. A., Lyu, L. & Poulikakos, L. Towards artefact-free AFM
image presentation and interpretation. J. Microsc. 291,
163–176 (2023).
44. Shu, R., Das, N., Yuan, M., Sunkara, M. & Zhang, Y. Towards effective
genai multi-agent collaboration: design and evaluation for enterprise applications. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.
05449 (2024).
45. Gao, M. et al. Single-agent or Multi-agent Systems? Why Not Both?
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.18286 (2025).
46. Sreedhar, K. & Chilton, L. Simulating human strategic behavior:
comparing single and multi-agent LLMs. Preprint at https://doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.2402.08189 (2024).
47. Zhang, X. et al. Making a MIRACL: multilingual information retrieval
across a continuum of languages. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2210.09984 (2022).

Acknowledgements
N.M.A.K. acknowledges the funding support from Google Research
Scholar Award and the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. I.M. thanks
University Grants Commission (UGC), Government of India for the NETJRF fellowship (221610021768). J.S. acknowledge the funding received
from the Ministry of Education, Government of India, in the form of
research fellowship. M.Z. acknowledges the funding received from the
PMRF award by the Government of India. M.M.S. acknowledges support

Nature Communications | (2025)16:9104

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7
from the European Union (ERC, NewGLASS, 101044664). L.W.
acknowledges funding from the Carl Zeiss Foundation through its
Breakthrough program. The authors thank the IIT Delhi HPC facility for
computational and storage resources. We also thank Sushant Sinha for
his assistance with the image segmentation.

Author contributions
I.M. developed the AILA framework, generated the visualizations for the
ﬁgures and tables, and conducted the experiments. J.S. prepared ﬁgures and performed experiments. M.Z. contributed to the code development. M.M.S., K.W., and L.W. edited the draft and validated the
results. All authors contributed to the conceptualization of the project,
the design of the methodology. I.M. and N.M.A.K. wrote the original draft
of the manuscript. All authors contributed to reviewing and editing the
manuscript. N.M.A.K. and N.N.G. were responsible for funding acquisition, project administration, resource provision, and overall supervision
of the project.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64105-7.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Nitya Nand Gosvami or N. M. Anoop Krishnan.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025

15

